1

2
The Cycle of the Year: 
Traditional Predictive Astrology
by
Charles Obert
Foreword by
Dr. Benjamin N. Dykes, Ph. D
Almuten Press
2018
3
Published and printed in the United States of America
By Almuten Press
3507 Taylor Street NE, Minneapolis, MN 55418
http://studentofastrology.com
©2018 by Charles Obert
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced
into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of both the copy-
right owner and the above publisher of this book.
The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any other means
without the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law. Please purchase only
authorized electronic editions and do not participate in or encourage electronic piracy of copy-
righted materials. Your support of the author's rights is appreciated.
 ISBN-13: 978-0-9864187-2-3
A PDF version of this book is available for purchase at the author's website, 
https://studentofastrology.com
4
Also by Charles Obert
Introduction to Traditional Natal Astrology: A Complete Working Guide for Modern Astrologers 
(2015)
Using Dignities in Astrology (2018)
(Both of these books are available in print through standard retail outlets,and in PDF form at the 
website, https://studentofastrology.com)
5
 This book is dedicated to my students at Kepler College, with a special 
thank you to Rebecca Bihr and Denise Menton for taking the time to 
thoroughly read and review previous versions of this book.
6
Table of Contents
Foreword........................................................................................................................9
Introduction...................................................................................................................11
Using this Book with Morinus............................................................................................................ 12
A Note on House Systems.................................................................................................................. 12
Symbolic Directions and Time Lords.............................................................................13
Symbolic Directions........................................................................................................................... 13
Returns............................................................................................................................................... 14
Time Lords.......................................................................................................................................... 15
General Interpretive Principles.....................................................................................16
Evaluating Dignity and Debility......................................................................................................... 18
The Cycle of the Year - Overview....................................................................................21
Profections....................................................................................................................23
Solar Returns................................................................................................................29
Solar Return with Profection - Charles Obert....................................................................................32
Primary Directions........................................................................................................36
Primary Directions - The Basics........................................................................................................ 36
Directing Other Points....................................................................................................................... 38
Directing Through the Bounds.......................................................................................................... 39
How Directing Through the Bounds Works...................................................................................... 43
Significant Points to Direct................................................................................................................ 45
How to Read the Directions Listings................................................................................................. 46
Start with the Ascendant.................................................................................................................... 47
Jimi Hendrix...................................................................................................................................... 50
Anita Bryant....................................................................................................................................... 53
Herman Melville................................................................................................................................ 56
Harry Belafonte.................................................................................................................................. 59
Transits.........................................................................................................................62
7
LOY and Transits - Charles Obert...................................................................................................... 63
Yearly Solar Return Directions......................................................................................67
Franklin D Roosevelt.......................................................................................................................... 71
Margaret Thatcher............................................................................................................................. 80
Preparing for a Client Reading......................................................................................89
Tying it All Together - Examples....................................................................................95
Marilyn Monroe................................................................................................................................. 96
The Las Vegas Shooting, October 1, 2017........................................................................................ 100
Napoleon Bonaparte........................................................................................................................ 109
The Gods Smile on Me - Charles Obert............................................................................................ 119
Maya Angelou................................................................................................................................... 124
Conclusions and Questions..........................................................................................137
Where to Go from Here................................................................................................143
Table of Essential Dignities..........................................................................................145
Using the Morinus Astrology Program.........................................................................147
8
Foreword
Although the traditional revival in astrology has been underway for many years, it takes time for
people to properly digest, understand, and practice new techniques. This is especially so when new
vocabulary and concepts are combined in new ways. Most people have heard of “directions,” but what
about profections or distributions? Likewise, we learn about things like “exaltation,” but what does it
really mean? We need solid, clear training to help us navigate the old texts, which can be unfamiliar. 
In The Cycle of the Year, my friend and colleague Charlie Obert is doing a great service to students of
astrology and the traditional revival in particular. The traditional approach to prediction not only
included a number of techniques not widely known today, but combined them in special ways to
include both symbolic and real-time motions. The “cycle” or “revolution” of the year refers not just to
solar revolutions (solar returns), but all of these techniques taken together and revisited on an annual
basis. 
Charlie begins by providing a solid but easy overview of key interpretive concepts, especially the idea
of “time lords,” and explaining that these techniques combine both symbolic time and motion, with
real-time motion (such as transits); we could even say that solar revolutions bridge the gap between
them, because a solar revolution is a set of transits at a symbolically important time (a year). Further
chapters use numerous natal charts to explain and illustrate transits, profections, primary directions,
the fuller technique for directions called “distributions,” solar revolutions, and then directions of the
solar revolution Ascendant. 
Charlie’s book is also valuable because a number of nativities are addressed more than once, with
multiple techniques. And happily for the student, he explains how to program and use the free
Morinus astrology program. Finally, he includes advice on what to prepare for client consultations
when you use these techniques. 
I know that you will appreciate Charlie’s straightforward approach to training people in these powerful
techniques, and your astrology will improve as a result! 
Benjamin Dykes
June, 2018 
9
10
Introduction
This book is the third in a series, designed to introduce the concepts and techniques of traditional
Western astrology to a wider audience, including practicing modern astrologers.
This volume covers a suite of predictive techniques known as the Cycle or Turning of the Year. It is the
most common combination of predictive techniques that was developed and widely carried forward
throughout the traditional astrology period.
My work with these techniques started with a study group on traditional astrology that I led here in
Minneapolis for around 3 years. The regular members included my friend and teacher, Dr. Benjamin
Dykes, Ph. D., the fine traditional astrologer Estelle Daniels, and the (mostly) modern astrologers,
Shawn Nygaard and Madeline Youngstrom. I learned a great deal from all of them.
Further material on directions came from a series of sessions I did with Ben Dykes, working with him
on some concepts he was developing.  The subject of these sessions was the best method of primary
directions to use in moving through the minor dignity known as bounds or terms. 
Prior to this work, I had not found primary directions to be all that terribly useful. Centering directions
on moving through the bounds, and combining them with profections and solar returns, is what made
the technique light up for me. Building on the work of Ben Dykes I have found enough fruitful results
in my own research that I want to share them with the astrology community, so that this neglected
timing technique can get the attention and use that it deserves.
I will be assuming a basic knowledge of astrology throughout this book. If you have a general
background in modern astrology you should be able to follow along, and I will be explaining terms and
concepts as I present them.
In an appendix at the back of the book there are suggestions for good sources of information on
traditional astrology in general, and on the specific techniques covered in this book.
My purpose in this book is not to be comprehensive, but to lay out a usable working framework of
techniques combined with general interpretive principles. Given this framework and background, the
wealth of further details in the many traditional texts available can be fruitfully studied and integrated.
The book will focus very heavily on examples showing how the predictive techniques manifest in actual
events. 
Along with covering the entire cycle of the year, the second major purpose of this book is to recover the
forgotten principle that primary directions is intended to be a time lord system, one that deals with
spans of time rather than primarily pinpointing specific event times.
The core techniques I am using here are useful to both traditional and modern astrologers. Hopefully
this will help to inspire more work with these techniques by a variety of schools.
11
Using this Book with Morinus
There is a very good free astrology program available named Morinus, which can be used to generate
the necessary charts and listings to work with the full cycle of the year. The program includes the natal
chart, profections and solar returns. It also includes the primary directions to use with the bounds, and
the yearly direction of the solar return ascendant around the wheel in one year.
The program runs on all main computer operating systems - Windows, Mac and Linux.
I have full instructions for downloading and using Morinus in a separate chapter at the end of this
book.
As you read through the book I encourage you to draw up the charts and listings and apply them to
your own life.  That will give you a very good feel for how the techniques work, as you watch them
come alive in context.
A Note on House Systems
The predictive techniques covered in this book can be used with any house system.  With the possible
exception of profections, the techniques apply equally well. I discuss issues with profections and
quadrant house systems in the chapter on that topic.
All chart examples in this book use whole sign houses, which is my preferred system.
12
Symbolic Directions and Time Lords
Throughout the history of astrology there have developed many different ways of moving a chart
forward in time for predictive purposes. The most obvious one, transits, works with the actual location
of the planets during a given time period or moment in time.
Transits work for prediction - but they don't always work consistently. Working with transits by
themselves there is no good, reliable way of figuring out which transits will be important, and which
will come and go without any particularly significant event. (I have seen modern astrologers argue that
every transit has a significant effect or event, but that sometimes the effect is internal so that we can't
visibly see it. For me this begs the question. To say that all transits are significant, but sometimes we
don't perceive what that significance is, renders the concept of significance meaningless.)
For astrology to be really useful there needs to be some way of figuring out when significant events are
likely to happen.  There are many different ways of doing this, and this book will be using a
combination of them that is the most commonly found throughout the tradition.
Before we look at the specific systems, we need to consider the concept of symbolic directions.
Symbolic Directions
Directions are based on taking a defined symbolic way of moving a chart forward, and equating it to a
period of time.
Let x = y. Let this particular movement in the chart equate to this particular period of time. 
There are many, many different systems for doing this.
The most basic system, the grand-daddy of them all, is called primary directions, and is based on the
daily movement of the circle of the zodiac as it rises up above the horizon at the Ascendant. Using the
Ascendant, primary directions takes the distance that the zodiac moves past the Ascendant in 1/360th
of a day,  which is 4 minutes of clock time, and lets that movement symbolically equal one year of life.
Another very common system, secondary directions, takes the distance that a planet moves through
the zodiac in one day, and defines that as equal to one year of life. Planets all move through the zodiac
at different rates, so each planet has its own rate of secondary direction.
Solar arc, which is a derivative of secondary directions, moves all of the planets and points in the chart
the same distance that the Sun moves. In solar arc the distance the Sun moves in 1 day equates to one
year of life. In secondary directions each planet has its own unique motion, and in solar arc every
planet is moved the same distance as the Sun.
13
The system of profections, which is very widely used in traditional astrology, works by defining a
movement of one zodiac sign as equal to one year of life. It is very simple, and very effective, and is a
central part of the predictive system we will be using in this book.
The important point to realize is that every one of these systems is based on a strictly
symbolic equation. There is absolutely nothing which says that four minutes of movement of the
Ascendant relative to the zodiac should equal a year, or that movement of one sign should equal a year.
For this reason I do not think you can argue that primary directions are in any way more "real" than
secondary directions, or that either of those are any less symbolic or arbitrary than the equation of one
sign per year in profections.
There are many, many more systems of symbolic direction that have been used throughout the history
of astrology. The British astrologer Charles E O Carter has a very fine book on the subject that is well
worth reading and pondering. The fact that so many different systems of symbolic direction work so
very well is one of the amazing and mind-boggling things about astrology. It is very well worth
meditating on what the fact of  symbolic directions working might tell us about the nature of the
universe. This is far beyond any sort of correlations that can be explained by a simple scientific cause
and effect model.
Strictly speaking the only non-symbolic way of moving a chart forward is using transits, which is
mapping the actual position of the planets at a given moment in time, sometimes stand-alone,
sometimes combined with another chart like a natal chart. All other systems - primary directions,
secondary directions, solar arc directions, minor and tertiary progressions, profections, and so on - are
symbolic, and no one of them can claim to be any more or less "real" than any other.
Returns
Astrology also gives great significance to the moment in time when a planet or angle returns to exactly
the same point that it occupies in the natal chart. These are called returns.
The most basic, and most important, is the solar return or birthday chart. The return is calculated for
the time each year when the Sun returns to exactly its natal position. The position of the planets at the
time of the solar return determine how the events of the coming year will go. Since solar returns
happen once a year, the return chart is in effect for a year. Solar returns have been a cornerstone of
predictive astrology since its beginning, and it is a core technique in the system we are using.
Every planet has its own cycle of return charts, and all can be used for predictive purposes. The Saturn
return is probably the most important of the other planetary returns, but all of them are used.
Both return charts, and the many different systems of symbolic direction, are designed to work with a
concept that goes back to our Hellenistic Western roots - the concept of time lords.
14
Time Lords
In traditional astrology the different ways of dividing up time mark periods where different planets
become active and take charge of the person's life. These are called time lord systems.
In time lord systems the planets take turns running things in a particular area of a person's life for a
particular period.
There is an important concept here that is quite a bit different from how modern astrologers ordinarily
think about transits.
The time lord direction systems are not about individual points in time, they are about
extended periods of time. This is the key to using primary directions, profections, solar
returns, and other time lord systems.
Primary directions, also known as distribution or circumambulation through the bounds, is one of the
most important and widely used throughout the tradition until modern times.  It works with the minor
dignity of term or bound. The ruler of the bound is the time lord responsible for that period, and we
look at the position and condition of that planet to see how that period will work out. We will be going
into this system in great detail. Again, remember - these directions are about periods of time, not
individual events.
There are also other time lord systems in traditional astrology. The system of aphesis, also known as
zodiacal releasing, is another time lord system which has recently been re-discovered, and which has
become more widely known from the teaching work of the modern Hellenistic astrologer Chris
Brennan. 
Profections are another time lord system that takes the symbolic movement of one zodiac sign to equal
one year. The ruler of the zodiac sign the profection comes to is the Lord of the Year, and we look to
that planet's position and condition.  Yearly profections are one of the major techniques in the cycle of
the year we are using in this book. 
In a traditional context, solar returns can also be understood as a time lord technique, since they are
activated and in authority for that year of the person's life.
The cycle of the year, the predictive group of techniques we are using in this book, take a nested group
of these time lord systems to determine how a period of time will work out.
Before we look at those systems we need to review the general interpretive principles that are used
with all of them.
15
General Interpretive Principles
There are a lot of very specific rules and examples found throughout the astrology tradition on using
the prediction systems. What I want to cover here are some basic principles that provide a framework
for understanding and organizing the details of the tradition. Given these principles you have a way to
approach and study the wealth of detailed rules and examples in the traditional source material.
These are the main organizing principles for working with predictive systems.
1) Evaluating condition of the planets and points in the chart is at the very heart of traditional
astrology. Each of the planets is weighed in terms of how balanced or unbalanced, how helpful or
harmful, how strong or weak, how prominent or hidden its expression is likely to be. Learning the
various rules for evaluating condition is the core of learning traditional astrology. I will be using basic
evaluative principles in the examples, and explaining them as I go along.
2) Fulfilling the promise of the natal. All predictive techniques start with, refer to and end with
the natal chart. The expression of a planet in a timed technique like directions or a solar return will
always be shaped by its location and condition in the natal chart. If the potential is not in the natal it
will not be fulfilled in the direction. If you have a very strong Jupiter in a return chart, and Jupiter in
the natal chart is weak and debilitated, then the expression in the return will be middling at best. If
you have a debilitated planet in a return chart that is very strong and balanced in the natal, its
expression will be hindered that year, but it will not be as harmful as it could be if it were also in bad
shape in the natal. By contrast, a planet that is very strong in both the natal and return charts will
likely be very strong and positive in expression that year. Any planet which is activated in any
of the predictive systems will express in terms of its natal condition and potential.
3) Predicting backward to predict forward - To evaluate how a planet will express as a time lord,
check if there are any previous periods in the person's life where that same planet was active. If you get
a sense of what happened in the previous period, and what kind of feel it had, it is likely that the
current period with that same planet as time lord will have the same qualities. This applies to all time
lord techniques including directions, solar returns, and profections, as well as repeated transits.
As an example of predicting backward, I usually draw up a solar return for the previous year for a
client, and then have some dialog on how the previous year has been for the client based on that return
chart. This helps me to discuss the current year, and I builds credibility with the client. I discuss
predicting backward further in the chapter on preparing for a client reading.
16
4) Congruence or Alignment - For a significant event, you are looking for having the different
systems line up. When the potential of the natal is matched by the other levels then you have the
potential for powerful action for good or ill. The more the different levels line up, the more significant
the event. Correlation is another good word for the same principle - the more correlations there are
pointing to the same kind of event, the more likely there will be a significant event. You will see this at
work in the examples later in the book. This principle is actually an extension of the second principle,
fulfilling the promise of the natal. Another, simple way to say it - when the stars all line up, big things
happen. (When the Moon is in the seventh house, and Jupiter aligns with Mars...)
5) Questions providing focus - This is a general principle for any interpretation in astrology, and it
is particularly important when dealing with the overwhelming amount of data involved in coordinating
multiple timing and prediction techniques. Astrology is designed to answer questions . Clients
come to a consultation with an agenda, a need, a question that needs answering. That question
provides the focus and frame for interpreting the timing data. 
The language of astrology is symbolic and multi-valent, having a wealth of different meanings.
Astrology charts do not mean anything in general; they only take on meaning within the context of a
question.  
The question provides the frame and filter telling you what to look for in the chart data. It helps you
pick out what is important. Given that frame, my experience is that the astrology data organizes itself
around that question, and provides a coherent answer.
I discuss this principle in much greater length in the chapter on preparing for a client session.
17
Evaluating Dignity and Debility
The heart of traditional astrology is this process of evaluating strength and weakness, dignity and
debility. This is a brief summary of the main conditions and vocabulary used. (Please see my book,
Using Dignities In Astrology, for an extended treatment of these concepts.)
Dignity - A planet having a dignity has an assigned role and responsibility. Dignity strengthens a
planet, gives it more influence and makes it more at home.
Debility - The opposite of dignity. A debilitated planet is weakened in some way. It can be off balance,
not at home or in an uncongenial environment. 
Benefic - Helpful. Jupiter and Venus are called benefic because their action is usually moderate,
comfortable and helpful. We usually enjoy benefics, and they feel good.
Malefic - Harmful. Mars and Saturn are called malefic because their action is usually immoderate and
extreme. The malefics can limit, injure, oppose or destroy. Malefics are usually not considered to be
enjoyable. A Saturn return may end up being a useful and positive time, but not that many people
would describe it as fun.
Sect - This divides chart and planets into day and night, or diurnal and nocturnal. A day chart has the
Sun above the horizon, and with night it is below. The day planets are Sun, Jupiter and Saturn. The
night planets are Moon, Venus and Mars. Mercury varies - when rising before the Sun at an earlier
degree he is diurnal, and after the Sun at a later degree is nocturnal. Planets are more at home if the
sect of the chart matches their sect. The Sun and Jupiter are happier and more helpful in day charts,
while the Moon and Venus are more at home and effective in night charts. Similarly, the day planet
Saturn is more crabby and harmful at night, and the night planet Mars is more irritable and hurtful
during the day.
---
Essential Dignities are based on zodiac position, so they are the same for everyone on the planet at
a given point in time. There are five essential dignities, two considered major and three considered
minor. There is a table of essential dignities at end of book.
Each of the major dignities has a corresponding detriment at the sign opposite.
The Major Dignities are as follows:
Rulership is the strongest dignity. The ruler of a sign is its controller, manager, owner. The ruler is
the main planet responsible for the affairs of a sign.
18
Detriment happens when a planet is in the sign opposite to one it rules. A planet in detriment is out
of its home in an unfriendly environment. It is off balanced, uncomfortable and stressed. A planet in
detriment can be a loner or an outsider working for change, so detriment can be turned to advantage.
Exaltation is the other major dignity. An exalted planet is valued, honored, listened to and given
respect. I could also connote arrogance or a high opinion of oneself.
Fall is the opposite of exaltation. A planet in fall is not valued, not honored, ignored and not given
respect. Often planets in fall work extra hard to over-compensate for this lack of respect and attention.
The minor Dignities are as follows:
Triplicity is a group or tribe dignity. There are three planets that have triplicity in each of the four
elements. a planet in triplicity is at home in its group and has general support and good fortune from
its tribe or extended family.
Term or Bound is featured in the traditional use of primary directions. A planet with dignity by term
is competent and functional, and it is in charge of how things are implemented. That is why the
technique of directing through the bounds is so important. 
Face is a very minor dignity, with very little power and no authority. Face usually concerns
appearance, ornament, the image or mask that a planet presents to the world.
In terms of their strength the dignities are additive. A planet with two minor dignities is considered
equal in strength to having one major dignity.
Peregrine is the condition of a planet with no essential dignity. The word means homeless or
wanderer, someone out on the street with no accepted place. Peregrine planets rely heavily on the
condition of their rulers, the planets having dignity over it, for how well they function. A peregrine
planet with rulers in good condition is greatly supported, and a peregrine planet with weak or harmful
rulers gets no support from its environment.
---
The remaining concepts have to do with how the planets interact with each other and with their
position relative to the angles and houses.
Reception is a very important principle. It concerns how the planets interact and relate to each other
in terms of their dignity with each other.
Reception is the relationship of ruler to ruled. Venus in Aries is received by Mars in its rulership - Mars
manages or rules Venus, and is also responsible for treating Venus as well as it can given its own
condition. Reception also applies to the other dignities. That same Venus in Aries is received by the
Sun in its exaltation, and by its three triplicity rulers, Sun, Jupiter and Saturn. 
19
Mutual Reception is the beneficial condition where each of two planets receives the other into one
of its dignities. Venus in Aquarius and Saturn in Libra are each in the sign the other rules. Mixed
reception, where the planets are received in different dignities, are also valid. For instance Saturn in
Aries and the Sun in Capricorn have a mixed mutual reception from exaltation to rulership, and this
greatly enhances their relationship.
Reception in a minor dignity is not as strong, but is definitely preferable to no reception. Two planets
having mutual reception in two minor dignities is considered equivalent to major mutual reception.
Planets with reception are more inclined to work with each other, and planets without reception lack
good will and responsibility towards each other.
Aversion concerns relationship and communication. The main Ptolemaic aspects are the
conjunction, sextile, square, trine, opposition, in which planets can see each other and have
communication. Aspects are by whole sign in the earliest Western astrology - a planet anywhere in
Aries is considered trine to a planet anywhere in Leo. Planets which do not have a whole sign aspect to
each other are called averse which means "turned away". Planets in aversion can't see each other. They
are out of touch, and there is a lack of control and communication.
Combustion is a debility. Being too close to the Sun is the worst thing that can happen to a planet.
Any planet within roughly 8 degrees of the Sun or less is called combust, meaning burnt up. A combust
planet loses all its strength. There is a transition condition - planet that is between 8 and 17 degrees
from the Sun is under the rays, also called under the beams, which weakens, inhibits and hides its
action. Combustion or under the rays is considered much worse when a planet is approaching
conjunction than when it is separating. The effect of combustion is strongly influenced by the dignities
of the Sun and the other planet, and by any reception between them.
Cazimi is a special case where a planet is within 17 minutes of the Sun, at the heart of the Sun. Instead
of being weakened, a planet cazimi is greatly strengthened. It is the king's favorite and sitting right on
the king's lap on his throne. (17 minutes is the most commonly used orb for a planet being cazimi, but
there are some traditional texts that use an orb as large as one degree.)
Angularity is the measure of the strength of a planet relative to its proximity to one of the four
angles. Planets close to an angle are angular and considered very strong and prominent, visible and
active in the world. The next house over is called succedent and is not as strong. The weakest condition
is called cadent which means "falling away". A cadent planet is furthest from the angle and is very
weak. Cadency can also indicate action turned inward.
Retrograde describes a planet moving backwards in the zodiac. Retrograde is moving against the
grain and is generally considered a debility. It weakens, delays and impedes action. A retrograde
planet can be stubborn or ornery, or it can be rebellious. Like all of the other conditions here, a
retrograde condition is greatly influenced by how it combines with the other dignities and debilities. A
retrograde planet that is otherwise dignified can be quite strong.
20
The Cycle of the Year - Overview
The group of time lord systems that I am presenting in this book is by far the most commonly used in
the history of traditional Western astrology. 
This system has its roots at the core of our Western astrology. It is found in Dorotheus in his landmark
work,  Carmen  Astrologicum, which is arguably the single most influential text in the later
development of astrology. The core principles are also found in Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos, in Vettius
Valens and other influential Hellenistic astrologers.
The system was carried forward and developed further throughout the Persian and Arabic periods of
astrology, and its fullest development is probably in the work of the Arabic Astrologers, notably
Masha'Allah and Abu Mashar. In that setting it is known as the Cycle or Turning of the Year, referring
to the time of the solar return that marks the start of a cycle, and is a suite of predictive techniques to
be done annually.
The system is also found in Bonatti, and in William Lilly. Book three of Lilly's Christian Astrology is
based on this system and includes an extensive series of chart examples showing how it plays out
through the years in a single person's life. 
The system forms an interlocking series of predictive techniques covering different periods of time.
The following pyramid diagram gives a schematic idea of the basic techniques and how they build on
each other, with the lower levels providing a context for the higher.
Starting at the bottom of the pyramid, the most important chart is the natal, the radix or root chart in
effect for entire lifetime. You can think of it as a time lord chart where the span of jurisdiction of the
time lords covers the entire life.
21

Next is the system of primary directions through the dignity of bounds. This divides the life into
periods of different length, that can span months or years. The time lords here work in the context of
the natal chart.
Next comes profections, an annual form of direction that is primarily used to determine the Lord of
the Year who is featured in all of the charts for that year.
Within that context comes solar returns, abbreviated as SR throughout this book. This is also an
annual system, where the configuration at the time of the Sun's exact return to its natal position sets
the theme for the coming year.
Transits are last in importance, and they function within the context of all of the other systems
combined.
---
We will now examine each of the predictive levels in turn.  When you are learning time techniques, it is
easiest to start with profections, and look at how they interact with the solar return.
22
Profections 
Profections are a simple symbolic technique for moving a chart forward in time. With profections the
equation is that one zodiac sign equals one year of life. For instance, if at birth an Ascendant is at 17
Sagittarius, on the first birthday the profected Ascendant moves to 17 Capricorn. On the second
birthday it is at 17 Aquarius, and so on through the signs, until at age 12 the profected Ascendant
returns again to its birth location at 17 Sagittarius and the cycle begins again.
In Hellenistic astrology, which works with houses primarily by whole sign, the profected movement is
one sign at a time, and the entire sign is activated. In later traditional astrology, where quadrant
houses are used, you will often see profection as taking place in 30 degree increments, which means
that the profected sign can change in the middle of a solar year. Lilly describes the system in this form,
but in his examples he effectively takes the location of the profected Ascendant as applying to the
whole year and does not break it down further than that.
I primarily use whole sign houses in my work, and profections as a system are primarily designed to be
used with whole sign houses.
If you think of the cycle going around the chart in multiples of 12, profections are quite easy to figure
out. The profected cycle returns to the first house for all numbers divisible by 12 - 0 or birth, 12, 24, 36,
48 and so on. The second house gets numbers divisible by 12 plus one - 13, 25, 35 etc. The 7th house
years are divisible by 6, and the 4th and 10th house years (in whole sign) are divisible by 3.
Take a person's age, divide by 12, take the remainder and add one to it, and that will give you the
profected house of the year. For example, age 42 is 6 more than 36 so the profected house of the year is
the seventh. Alternately, you could take the number of the house and subtract one from it. First house
gets the birth year, second house gets first birthday, house 3 gets birthday 2. Age 12 (or zero) gets the
first house again.
On the next page we have some chart illustrations that demonstrate the yearly movement.
23
Here is the birth chart of Jimi Hendrix, followed by the profected charts for his first, second and third 
birthday.
Birth, Age 12, 24 Age 1, 13, 25
Age 2, 14, 26 Age 3, 15, 27
You can watch the chart rotate. When you put the profected chart in a bi-wheel with the natal you will 
watch the profected Ascendant and other planets move forward relative to the natal chart one sign at a 
time per year. At age one the Ascendant is in house two, at age two in house three, and so on.
24

Using Profections
The simplest way to use this technique, and by far the most common and basic, is to profect just the
one point, the Ascendant, moving it forward one sign or 30 degrees in a year. The ruler of the sign of
the profected Ascendant would be considered the profected Lord Of the Year, which I will refer to as
LOY. That planet is particularly important for that year relative to its natal house and condition, and to
its location and condition in the solar return for that year.
The profected chart is usually used in conjunction with the solar return, and the profected LOY is
considered the most important planet in the SR. The profected sign and its house location in the SR
also takes on increased importance. This profected sign is featured in a technique for directing the SR
Ascendant all the way around the chart in a single year for finding peak times of activity, a technique
we will explore in a later chapter.
On the next page is the natal chart of Napoleon Bonaparte with the profected chart for the year he was
appointed consul for life.
Napoleon was born in 1769 and this is the profected chart for age 33, which moves the profection to
the natal tenth house. That sign (Leo) is activated, the ruler of the sign (Sun) is Lord of the year, and
the other planets in that house (Sun, Mercury) are also activated. 
25
What is Important - What is Activated
Along with the Lord of the Year or LOY, there are other areas to consider being activated by the
profected movement of the Ascendant to a new sign
The sign of profection itself is activated in both the natal chart and the solar return (SR).  The house
location of that sign in natal and SR are important, and transits or directions through that sign are
worth noting.
In a supplementary way the signs are activated in what are called the stakes to profected sign. These
are the signs in opposition or square. These are the signs of the same mode as the profected sign - so,
for instance, when the fixed sign Leo is active, all of the other fixed signs are also activated. These are
not primary, but they are worth paying attention to.
We mentioned that the Lord or ruler of the profected sign is primary in importance.
In addition, any planets in the profected sign in the natal chart are also activated. There is some
difference in emphasis in traditional texts as to which planet(s) are more important, the sign ruler or
26

planets in the sign. I find both to be important I usually start with the sign ruler, as that is always
important since there will often be cases where there is no planet residing in the sign. 
Very important - note that only the traditional seven planets are eligible to be activated
as time lords in this system . While I do pay attention to any outer planets that reside in the
profected sign, I do not give them the same emphasis or the same importance.
Along with the time lord, any other signs and houses that are ruled by that time lord are worth paying
attention to.
Profections and Angles
The angularity of the house profected to in the natal has significance. In general, profections that fall
on one of the angular houses - one, four, seven and ten - have more strength and sometimes more
importance since they activate the natal angles. Profections to cadent houses can connote a relative
lack of force or of activity in the world since cadent houses are considered weak. This does not seem to
be as important or powerful as the condition of the LOY sign ruler, or of any planets in this house.
Angularity also makes a difference relative to the solar return chart. Having the profected sign of the
year fall on one of the SR angles, especially the Ascendant or Midheaven, definitely increases its
importance.
Profections with Quadrant House Systems
The system of profections is designed to work with whole sign houses, where movement of one sign
equals movement of one house per year. Using profections with quadrant houses, where the houses are
not all the same size and some signs span multiple house cusps, can create some problems. 
The most common way to do profections with quadrant houses in the traditional literature is to move
the profected Ascendant 30 degrees per year. Depending on the particular chart, this could mean that
the profection falls in the same house two years running, and some houses will be completely skipped.
To get around that problem, if you take the profected movement as applying to one house per year,
then some signs and rulers can be completely skipped, and other rulers can stay LOY two years
running.
Some traditional sources describe moving the Ascendant degree-wise through the year, so that it
changes signs in the middle of the year. Theoretically this means that the profected Lord of the Year
changes at that point. From what I have seen, even those sources that describe this changing of signs
mid year still talk about the planet ruling the sign location at the birthday as Lord of the Year, and do
not go into the interpretive meaning of changing signs. Effectively the system is usually described as
the single sign and its Lord(s) applying for the whole year, which is the same as with whole sign
houses.
27
There are enough anomalies with profections and quadrant houses that I use the system only with
whole sign houses.
Profecting the Entire Chart
There is a fuller version of profection that I will also be exploring in some of the examples. The
technique is to profect the entire chart, turning every point in the chart one sign per year. In the
profected chart all of the planets stay in the same position relative to each other but they are in
different signs, so they move to different houses relative to the natal chart. 
The practice of profecting multiple points in the chart as they change signs and houses can be found in
texts from the Arabic period of traditional astrology, including Abu Mashar. Vettius Valens also
profects multiple points for different topics. Profecting the entire chart is found in book 3 of William
Lilly’s Christian Astrology, and Lilly's interpretations take into account new sign and house position,
changes of dignity, and aspects from the profected chart to the natal. He effectively treats it as a stand-
alone chart in its own right and as an entire chart in relation to the natal.
When you move the chart as a whole, the planets in the profected chart can line up with different
planets in the natal chart, and the interaction affects how they are interpreted.  I pay most attention to
where the profected planets form near conjunctions with natal points and planets.  This is in harmony
with the general principle of profections that a point entering a sign activates that entire sign. It makes
sense that planets occupying the same sign affect each other.
I also pay attention to how the shift of signs affects the planetary dignity, going from dignified to
debilitated or vice-versa. These factors can be important when they concur with the directions and
return for the year - as with all of the techniques, congruence between the systems is one of the key
principles of interpretation.
Profections and Transits
Profections determine the main context for what transits are most important. Note all of the following
transits as having special emphasis.
1) transits to LOY in natal or SR
2) transits of LOY to natal and to SR
3) transits through the profected sign of the year
4) retrogrades and stations by LOY
5) if the Sun or Moon is LOY, the full and new Moons can be important, and eclipses are especially 
important. Note where lunations occur that tightly trigger natal or SR planets or angles, especially 
hard aspects (conjunction, square, opposition).
28
Solar Returns
Most astrologers are familiar with the solar return chart, which is cast for the moment in time that the
Sun returns to the exact location that it was in the natal chart. It sets the tone for the entire year.
In most traditional texts the solar return is cast for the natal location. Casting a return for the location
the person is at the time of the return originated with the French astrologer Morin in the 16th century.
I follow the tradition of using the natal location.
Relocated solar return charts do work, and they seem to be valid in the same way that relocated natal
charts are valid. The birth location chart is still primary, and the relocated chart is a kind of overlay. I
find that to be the same with the solar return chart - the return chart for time of birth is primary.
Solar returns were traditionally cast non-precessed, and that is what I will use.
How to Interpret Solar Returns - General Rules
Here are some guidelines for I how use solar returns when doing client work.
I always start with asking the client what particular themes or areas of their life are of concern in the
reading. I use those themes as the primary frame of reference for making sense of the solar return and
of all the techniques. I find that frame to be of primary importance in any kind of astrology work.
I know I have an important and valid reading when I can see the client's areas of concern showing up
as the main areas of focus in the solar return and in the other predictive techniques, and that happens
far more often than not. Their main concerns should make sense of the SR chart and other directions,
and vice versa. Sometimes they may show that events will go in a direction they want, sometimes it
appears that things will go contrary to their wishes, but the data is almost always relevant to their
concerns.
I like to start with drawing up at least two, and sometimes three solar return charts - for at least half of
the previous year, and for most of the year coming up. I find that helps to give a sense for a direction
that things are going.
As another benefit, I find that talking about the past year and "predicting" it accurately builds
confidence in what we will say about coming year. This is an example of predicting backwards to
predict forwards. The information about the year just past often helps to flesh out the interpretation of
the upcoming year.
As with all predictive techniques, for important planets you always evaluate and compare their
condition in the natal chart to their condition in the SR. Do they reinforce, or contradict?
Interpretation always starts with, and returns to, the natal chart.
29
There are some main places to look for determining which planets are likely to be important in the
return, and they are exactly the same places you would look when evaluating a natal chart.
Start with the sign and house of the solar return Ascendant. That house, and natal planets in that
house, are activated for the year. That is the rising sign, so it shows what is coming up this year.
The ruler of the SR Ascendant is activated in both the SR and the natal.
Any planets in SR angles, especially in the Ascendant, are also activated.
Along with its connection to the natal chart, it is important to remember that the SR chart is valid as a
stand-alone chart, so it tells the story of the year by itself. I often find that the SR house placement is
as or more important than natal house location in terms of the events of the year. 
As with any other chart, check the solar return for dignity and debility of planets, and any close aspects
or aspect configuration.
Signs of a Significant Year
There are some general signs that a given solar return is likely to be a significant year.
The single most important pointer of a big year is to see the solar return Ascendant on or near a natal
angle, especially the natal Ascendant or Midheaven. Having the SR Ascendant within about 10 degrees
of the natal Ascendant in the same sign is a very strong indicator of a big year.
Having the strong natal planets also strong and prominent in the solar return is another significant
indicator. Those strong planets are likely to fulfill their natal promise.
It is also important when the planets active in the primary directions, especially for the Ascendant and
Midheaven, are also strong in the solar return.
The main principle is congruence - you have a big year when the natal chart, directed time lords,
profected chart and solar return all line up in the sense of all featuring or activating the same planets.
Whenever a planet that is strong in the natal is also active and strong in the other levels of the system
you have a particularly significant influence to pay attention to. We will be noting such redundant
planets repeatedly in the examples.
30
Charts to Look At
These are the charts I look at when analyzing a solar return for a particular year.
1) The stand alone solar return as a chart in its own right.
2) A bi-wheel with the natal chart in the center and the SR around it.
3) A bi-wheel with the SR in the center and the natal around it.
Since the solar return chart is so important in its own right I find myself placing increased emphasis
on its house positions. The bi-wheel with the natal around SR is often the most meaningful for houses.
Looking at the two charts together, check where significant planets from the two charts trigger each
other, or where planets trigger angles. Planets that are angular in either chart are important.
Solar Returns Plus Profections
Analyzing the solar return chart I almost always start with the profected LOY. This is primarily the
ruler of the sign of the year, but I also note the SR position of planets that are in the natal chart in the
profected sign of the year.
Note the solar return house placement of the profected sign of year, and any planets in that house in
the SR. The SR house and planet are at least as important as the natal location of the profected house,
if not more important.
This next example shows how solar returns and profections work together with the natal. It is taken
from my own life history for the year 2009, which marked some very important events in my life. In
this example the profected lord of the year, its condition and house location are all of central
importance.
31
Solar Return with Profection - Charles Obert
Charles Obert, March 7, 1952, 3:38 am, Queens, New York City. Rodden Rating A.
There were two major events in my life in 2009. By far the most important is that my wife Cindy died
of cancer, after spending the last months of her life in home hospice. It was a very public death - we
opened the house for our friends to visit, and before she died we held a memorial service for her that
was attended by hundreds of our friends. That same year I accepted permanent employment at the
Science Museum of Minnesota, a training position that I held for over ten years.
The chart above shows my natal chart surrounded by the profected chart for 2009. Note the profected
Ascendant is in the 10th house of career, which speaks to my new job. The sign of the year is Libra, and
the LOY Venus is in bad shape in the profected chart, in detriment, in Scorpio in the 11th house of
friends and communities, right on my Midheaven - this speaks to the public hospice period and the
memorial. The planet Saturn is in the profected sign Libra, and profected Saturn is in bad shape, in
detriment in Cancer in the 7th house of my marriage partner.
32

In the next few chart illustrations I want to look at my solar return for that year, noting especially the
house position of Venus.
This is my solar return for 2009.
Note that LOY Venus is in detriment in this chart also, in the sixth house of illness. Venus rules the SR
seventh house of marriage partner, and the SR twelfth house of illness, nursing and confinement.
Mars, the lord of the SR Ascendant is in the fourth house, in a sign ruled by Saturn. Fourth house is
concerned with endings, and with home, household - I spent much of the year home with Cindy in the
period leading up to her death. The fourth house is also emphasized by a major stellium of four
planets, plus the North Node, which magnifies whatever it is near.
Also note that Saturn, activated from the profection, is in a tight opposition with a Sun/Uranus
conjunction, and Sun is applying, first to oppose Saturn, then to conjunct Uranus. Oppositions to the
Sun can connote major relationships, and a Sun/Saturn opposition can connote the end of a
relationship or death of a partner. Note that Uranus is in my natal seventh house in Cancer.
33

This bi-wheel shows my natal chart in the inner ring, and the solar return in the outer.
LOY Venus, in detriment in Aries, falls in my natal fourth house - Cindy spent the latter part of the
year in home hospice, and she died at home. Fourth house and sixth house meanings are combined in
home hospice. It is worth noting that SR Venus is conjunct natal Jupiter, and SR Jupiter is conjunct
natal Venus. This could be related to the open and supportive community we had helping us in her last
months.
In this chart the large stellium is in the second house, which is where natal Venus is located.
34

In this bi-wheel I reverse the two charts, with the SR in the center and the natal chart around it.
The connection between the fourth house (home hospice, dying at home) and sixth house (nursing,
illness) shows up twice. In the inner ring SR Venus is in the sixth house, and in the outer natal ring
Venus ends up in the fourth house.
Note also that SR Venus in the sixth is opposite natal Saturn in the twelfth house, associated with
confinement, hospitals and nursing, and natal Venus in the outer ring is ruled by that same Saturn.
There are several repeated themes here: Venus being in detriment, the connections linking fourth and
sixth house themes, and the connections to Saturn.
Later in the book I will be analyzing charts and events from 1985, which was the year Cindy and I first
connected. Note that is 24 years prior to 2009, the year of her death. The relationship began and
ended with the same profected chart, which shows an overlap of theme or life area - but you will see
that the other charts are very different, just as the events were very different.
35

Primary Directions
A Little Bit of History
The use of primary directions, including directing through the bounds, goes back to our earliest
Hellenistic sources that are the basis of Western astrology. 
They are featured and used in the book Carmen Astrologicum  by Dorotheus of Sidon, which is
probably the single most influential surviving document in the history of Western astrology. (Some
would say that all of Western astrology since then is a series of footnotes to Dorotheus...) The
technique was passed down through the Persian and Arabic periods, and translated into Latin in the
Middle Ages. Primary directions are also found in the work of Vettius Valens, and other Greek and
Roman writers. 
Direction through the bounds is a central part of the suite of predictive techniques that developed in
the West. You will see them used in many of the books that Ben Dykes has translated. They are in The
Book of Aristotle  (thought by some to be by Masha'allah, but perhaps by al-Andarzaghar).  These
techniques are the core of the fully developed system in Abu Mashar. Those of you who find this
technique interesting are encouraged to research the original sources.
Direction through the bounds also survives intact in the work of the English astrologer William Lilly. It
is one of the main timing techniques he presents in Book 3 of Christian Astrology, the volume devoted
to natal interpretation. 
By the time of the very influential French astrologer Jean-Baptiste Morin in the 16th century, use of
the bounds was lost until the late 20th century. Primary directions have fallen out of general use since
the calculations can get quite complicated. We are currently seeing a revival of the use of primary
directions, and I hope that this study contributes to that revival.
Primary Directions - The Basics
Before we look at specifics of directing through the bounds, we need to look at what primary directions
are.
The system of primary directions is a symbolic way of moving a chart forward in time. Start with the
astronomical fact that the wheel of the zodiac rotates all the way around the earth in 24 hours, which is
360 degrees of motion equaling 24 hours clock time. If you take each of those degrees and have its
motion symbolically correspond to one year of the person's life, that one degree takes 4 minutes of
clock time.
That is the symbolic equation - one degree of the earth's rotation equals one year of
life.
36
If you consider what happens during the course of a day, the Ascendant and Midheaven axes stand still
while the wheel of the zodiac revolves in a clockwise direction up over the Ascendant, so that all 12
signs cross the Ascendant point in the course of a day.
The different zodiac signs rise at different rates past the Ascendant because of the slant of the ecliptic
relative to the equator and the earth's rotation. The rate that any zodiac sign rises past the Ascendant
is called oblique ascension, oblique because of the slant of the zodiac relative to the earth's rotation. 
Note: Because of the different rates of movement, one degree of oblique ascension may
be either more or less than one zodiac degree. The exact rate varies by latitude and by
zodiac sign because of the slant of the ecliptic relative to the earth's rotation.
Four minutes of clock time = 1 degree oblique ascension = 1 year of symbolic direction.
The earliest version of directions are sometimes referred to as distribution through the bounds, or
circumambulation through the bounds. I picture the Ascendant going for a bit of a stroll through the
zodiac as the day goes on. The two terms are synonyms for direction.
Consider the following chart.
This is the birth chart of the musician Jimi Hendrix. Notice that the Ascendant is at 24 degrees 40
minutes of Sagittarius. If you could watch the zodiac in the hours after his birth, you would see the
different zodiac signs coming up over the horizon, one after another, in what would be a clockwise
direction in the above chart. This is primary directions, and this clockwise revolution of the zodiac in
the course of a day is considered the primary motion of the zodiac.
Remember that the Ascendant is not moving through the signs. The Ascendant is standing still, and
the wheel of the zodiac rotates past it. We speak of directing the Ascendant through the signs in a
37

counter-clockwise direction, but actually the zodiac signs are moving in a clockwise direction past the
Ascendant. If this is the Ascendant going for a stroll, then the road of the zodiac is coming to meet the
Ascendant while it walks in place, like a kind of ultimate zodiac exercise treadmill.
The Ascendant was the earliest and most important point to be directed in this way. It is the most
natural point to measure, and the easiest to observe. 
Directing Other Points
The earliest method of directing other points in the chart involves treating every point as if it were at
the Ascendant. Each point is moved at the rate of its oblique ascension, which is the rate it would move
if it were coming up over the horizon. This method of directing the Midheaven and planets is still used
by some traditional astrologers, especially those with a Hellenistic emphasis. If you use the astrology
program Delphic Oracle, this is the method the program uses in the calculations it calls
circumambulation through the bounds, treating each point as if it were an Ascendant in terms of the
speed of its movement.
This doesn't match the rotation of the sky through the day. Thanks to the slant of the ecliptic, points
move at different rates depending where they are in the wheel. This is most obvious with the
Midheaven, which moves at the rate called Right Ascension. While oblique ascension varies according
to latitude, right ascension is independent of latitude. Right ascension and oblique ascension move at
different rates, so it makes sense to use right ascension with the Midheaven, and astrologers who use
primary directions are agreed on how to calculate it.
During the course of the day the four angles remain stationary while the wheel of the zodiac moves
past them. As we said, even though we speak of directing a point through the bounds it is actually the
bounds that move and come to meet the point.
With directing the planets it is a different story. They do not stand still, but revolve around the earth in
the course of a day along with the zodiac.
To direct the planets, picture them getting pinned to their particular position in the
sky while the wheel of the zodiac moves past them. This is a strictly symbolic situation that
has no correspondence to their actual daily movement. It is treating a planet as if it were an angle.
Since this doesn't actually happen astrologers have had to devise symbolic techniques for directing the
planets, and the different forms of calculating primary directions are the answers to that theoretical
dilemma. 
One of the earliest of the solutions, the one I will be using here, is known as directing by proportional
semi-arc. Basically this divides the daily wheel up into 4 quarters between the angles called semi-arcs,
measures how long it takes the planet to move from one angle to another within that quadrant or semi-
arc, and calculate what proportion of that quadrant the point has traveled. 
38
The technical geometrical and mathematical details of these calculations are beyond the scope of this
little book. See the appendix for sources of further information.
Fortunately we have the free astrology program Morinus, which does an excellent job with the
calculations. In an appendix I give instructions how to use Morinus to calculate directions. The
astrology program Delphic Oracle also does an excellent job of calculating primary directions in this
manner.
Now that we have a sense of what primary directions are, we need to look at using directions through
the bounds.
Directing Through the Bounds
 These are the key concepts to keep in mind to interpret directions through the bounds.
Primary directions have to do with periods of time rather than specific points or dates.
The bound lord is the most important ruler to consider how a given time period in
directions plays out.
Bounds or Terms
The words bound and term are two different English translations for the same dignity. It means a
circumscribed area like a plot of land, an area that has boundaries. "Bound" is the word used in the
translations of Ben Dykes and of the Project Hindsight people, and "Term" is the word used by William
Lilly and most English speaking astrologers since his time. 
39
The small divisions around the outside of this chart show the dignity of bounds.
The division into bounds is one of the three minor dignities in the full system of 5 essential dignities in
mature traditional astrology. The dignity of bounds divides up each sign into five unequal sections, one
for each of the planets other than Sun and Moon. The version I am using here is known as the
Egyptian bounds. It is found in Dorotheus of Sidon's enormously influential book,  Carmen
Astrologicum, and it is the oldest version of the bounds that we have. There is another version called
the Ptolemaic bounds from Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos, which was the most widely used version in later
Western astrology because of Ptolemy's influence. They were used by Lilly and other Renaissance
astrologers. 
In the chart above we see the twelve zodiac signs with Aries starting over on the left. The irregular
division around the outside of the wheel shows the bounds. The first 6 degrees of Aries, from 0 to 5
degrees 59 minutes, is under the bound rulership of Jupiter. The next 6 degrees are the bounds of
Venus, the next 8 degrees after that are the bounds of Mercury, and so on.
40

This is the same information on the bounds put in the form of a table. The number shown is the
starting degrees of the bounds ruled by that planet.
Significance of Bounds 
The meaning of the dignity of bound has to do with specific implementation, how something gets
carried out. It is a lower level functional dignity. It doesn't have the high level of control of the sign
ruler, but the sign ruler has to work through the bound ruler to get things done. If the sign ruler is CEO
of a company then the bound ruler is the lower level manager who implements the directives from the
CEO. If the sign ruler is the manager of a large farm, then the bound lord is in charge of implementing
actions on a specific plot of land on the farm.
The main use of the bounds in traditional astrology is with the primary direction technique we are
covering here.
41

These four charts are snapshots in time to illustrate directing the Ascendant through the bounds. The
first chart is for Hendrix at his birth time, and the Ascendant is late Sagittarius, in the bounds of
Saturn. Next chart 40 minutes later the Ascendant is early Capricorn in the bounds of Mercury. This
corresponds to the directed Ascendant for Hendrix for age 10. The third chart is another 40 minutes
later, and the Ascendant is mid Capricorn, very early in the bounds of Venus. This show the directed
Ascendant for Age 20. In the fourth chart, another 4o minutes later, the Ascendant is late Capricorn
in the bounds of Saturn, and corresponds to the directed Ascendant for age 30. These show the valid
directed positions for the Ascendant and Midheaven. Directed positions for the planets need to be
calculated symbolically.
Birth Age 10
Age 20 Age 30
42

How Directing Through the Bounds Works
This is a close up of a portion of the chart of Jimi Hendrix to illustrate how direction through the
bounds works. 
This is the lower left quadrant of the Jimi Hendrix chart. I have the dates marked on which the
directed Ascendant moves into a different bound. At birth, the Ascendant in Sagittarius is in the
bounds of Saturn. About a year later, May 1944, the Ascendant directs into the bounds of Mars. Mars
continues as the bound lord until November of 1948, when the Ascendant moves into the bounds of
Mercury at the beginning of Capricorn. The direction continues through to the entry into the Saturn
bounds in Capricorn in January 1970, and Hendrix died later that year. Remember, the Ascendant
is standing still while the zodiac rotates clockwise past it. We view that as the
Ascendant directing through the bounds, as in the above diagram.
The Participator or Partner
Working with the bound lord is the participator or partner, which is the last planet in the natal chart to
make a whole sign Ptolemaic aspect with the point being directed - conjunction, opposition, trine,
square or sextile. 
43

While the bound lord is the dominant influence to consider, the participator represents other people
who have an influence on the person in this area. The participator thus colors or flavors the work of the
bound lord, and can be either positive or negative, depending on its condition and its relation to the
bound lord in the natal chart.
Again this is the natal chart of Jimi Hendrix.
The Ascendant is at 24 Sagittarius, and the last
aspect it made was an opposition to Saturn at 9
Gemini in the 7th house. This means that Saturn is
the participator planet when Hendrix was born.
Saturn stays the participator until the Ascendant
directs to 17 Capricorn, in the bounds of Venus,
when it makes a sextile aspect to Mars at 17
Scorpio.  At  that  point  Mars  becomes  the
participator while Venus is the bound lord.
We will examine how these directions played out in
the life of Hendrix later in this chapter.
The bound lord is primary, the participator is supporting or secondary. The bound lord is in charge of
implementing this point, the participator represents supporting people or outside influences. I find
from my own work with the bounds that the participator also has a strong internal and psychological
component.
In referring to bound lord and participator I use a shorthand notation, with the two planets separated
by a slash, bound/participator. For example, Asc in Venus/Saturn refers to the bounds of Venus with
Saturn as participator.
William Lilly and Directing through the Terms
Book three of Lilly's Christian Astrology is devoted to natal interpretation. Here are some examples
from Lilly describing how the planet ruling the terms of the Ascendant sets the tone for activities in
that period.
On the Ascendant moving into the terms of Saturn. 
The Native is then usually slow and dull in his actions, little mind to speak, dogged and
reserved, full of Envy and Malice, hard to please, waspish, it represents the Native not
caring which end goes forward...(p. 657)
44

By contrast, this is the Ascendant in the terms of Venus .
The Native's Complexion and Disposition inclines to cheerfulnesse, he is active, and much
delighted in Womens companies, prone to Musick, Dancing, to all honest and pleasant
Sports and Pastimes, happy in the affaires he undertakes, and in his Trade. (p. 662).
Later in the book Lilly analyzes the natal chart of a merchant with directions year by year. Here is his
description of a direction of the Sun.
Sun to the Terms of Mercury induces the Native to be studious, and to pursue his Books
of Accounts, and to call in some Moneys owing, which may happily be returned, because
Mercury immediately comes to a semisextile of Jupiter in Scorpio, and in the tenth
house; the aspect may produce some preferment to the Native, or acquaintance with
some Jovial person, or Merchant of quality, from whom afterwards much good may be
expected. (p. 785)
 Note that Lilly is influenced by Kepler here, and uses a semisextile or 30 degree aspect. The
semisextile is not one of the traditional Ptolemaic aspects, so in this particular instance Lilly is
departing from tradition.  Given that, the description is a good example of how the aspected planet
affects the Sun's expression.
Significant Points to Direct
Different points in the chart can be directed for different subject areas.
The Ascendant is first and primary to consider, and I find it the most consistently useful when I use
it with readings and can interact with the subject. In looking at celebrity charts for this study I did not
find it as consistently useful, and I suspect that is because we often do not get a good sense of what is
going on with celebrities as whole people with multiple aspects to their lives. We see only the thin and
distorted picture that is displayed through the warped filter of the media limelight.
In the traditional usage of directions there are other main points that are consistently used along with
the Ascendant.
The Midheaven concerns career, reputation and work in the public eye. I find the Midheaven is often
the most useful point to consider when working with the directions of politicians and military leaders.
These two points, Ascendant and Midheaven, are the most consistently important and useful to direct.
This makes sense, since primary direction is a system that looks at movement of the angles through
the zodiac, and symbolically treats all of the planets as if they were angles in order to calculate their
directions.
45
Traditionally there are two other main points to look at in directions.
The Sun is worth considering for reputation and for general health and vitality.
The Moon is often useful for matters concerning physical health, and also for emotional state.
Traditional writers often refer to directing the Lot of Fortune also. I have not researched that enough
to speak on the topic.
Along with those four key points, the planet to direct may also depend on which planets are
particularly strong in the natal chart, and on which are activated in the solar return and profection for
the year.
It is often worth looking at the two malefics, Saturn and Mars, when there is a particularly negative,
violent or stressful event like a death. We will note that in in some of the examples.
Like pretty much any other technique in astrology, general rules and guidelines will take you only so
far. You really need to look carefully at each chart individually and determine its particular strengths
and weaknesses before you can determine which directions are important.  To use traditional
predictive techniques you need to master the use of dignity and debility in chart evaluation.
How to Read the Directions Listings
Throughout the examples in the book I will be using directions as they are printed out by the software
program Morinus. For instructions on using Morinus please see he section at the end of the book.
Here are two lines from the directions for Jimi Hendrix, and how to read them.
Z Sextile Mars D --> Asc 23.275900 1966.03.08
The Z stands for zodiacal directions, which is the kind we are using. 
The point we are directing is after the arrow - in this case, the Ascendant. The planet Mars is making
an exact sextile aspect to the Ascendant here. At the point the Ascendant was directed to 17 Capricorn,
in the bounds of Venus. The number, 23.275900, is the number of degrees of arc that the Ascendant
has been directed from its natal position to meet the exact sextile to his natal Mars position. March 8,
1966 is the day in Hendrix's life that this exact aspect happened. Always keep in mind that even though
we have an exact date here, directions have to do with blocks of time rather than exact dates.
Approximately March 1966 would be when Mars became the participator or partner planet at the
Ascendant. Venus was the bound lord at that time.
Any lines in the listing with just a planet name and no aspect indicate that the directed point has
moved to a conjunction with that planet.
46
Z (Capricornus)Saturn D --> Asc 27.129650 1970.01.13 
When you see a zodiac sign in parentheses listed to the left of the arrow, it means that the directed
point is moving into a different set of bounds. In this case the Ascendant has directed to the bounds of
Saturn in the sign Capricorn beginning January 13, 1970. Saturn being the bound lord, you would look
at the location and condition of Saturn in the natal chart to see how that might play out.
Put these two lines together, and we see that in January 1970 the Ascendant directed to the bounds of
Saturn, with Mars continuing as participator since it is still the last aspected planet. Saturn is the
primary influence, and Mars is secondary.
Start with the Ascendant
If you are new to working with directing through the bounds, a good place to start is with the
directions of the Ascendant for your own chart.
Run a listing of the Ascendant directions and partners for your entire life. Notice what blocks of years
correspond to what bound rulers. I find it helpful to write in what age the bound lord changes took
place. Next, jot down major life events within the periods. Notice in which bounds those events happen
to fall. If you have a specific planetary bound lord that has repeated in your life, think about whether
there are parallels or similar themes between those periods.
Always remember that how a bound lord plays out depends on the location and condition of that
planet in your natal chart. Your Jupiter is not the same as my Jupiter, and your Saturn is not the same
as my Saturn, because the planets differ in their natal starting conditions. 
I found it very useful to draw up the list of directions for my life, and then keep coming back and
looking at it over time. I find that I keep seeing new patterns emerge. 
I'll give you an example of what I mean, by talking about the kinds of things I noticed looking at bound
lord periods in my own life.
47
Charles Obert, March 7, 1952, 3:38 AM , Queens, New York. Rodden Rating A,
Saturn is exalted in Libra in my chart, but retrograde, and in mutual reception with Venus, tenth house
to second house. Saturn bound periods are definitely not fun - Saturn is always Saturn, in good shape
or bad - and Saturn periods are often a lot of work and involve delays, but they often involve my doing
okay financially and earning money, always by my own effort - tenth house to second house
connections. Saturn bounds sometimes involve interactions with work superiors who discipline me,
but in ways where they are trying to be fair, that work out as growing experiences for me - Saturn
exalted in the tenth house of work and bosses.
Interestingly, Mars periods are often times when I take some kind of initiative involving a sense of
spiritual purpose or calling - I have Mars in Scorpio conjunct my Midheaven so it is very strong and
prominent, and related to my sense of vocation. These are periods when want to I go my own way,
make my own decisions, and work on the things that are the most important to me spiritually. 
Not surprisingly, Mercury periods often involve a lot of focus on reading, thinking, writing, often
involving philosophical speculation, and sometimes going off in many directions at once - I have
Mercury in Pisces, in detriment and fall, in the third house. Mercury periods are fun, but they can get
very scattered.
Again I want to emphasize that you need to get to know how the planets act as bound lords in the
context of your own life as they emerge from the potential of your particular natal chart.
48

---
If you are using directions with another person, and you have a particular planet coming up as bound
lord, if that planet was bound lord in a previous period, it is worth giving the person those dates and
asking what that period was like. It will likely give you some clues as to how the recurrence of that
bound lord will work out. That is a good example of predicting backwards to predict forwards - if we
know how a planet acted in the past, we have a guideline as to how it will likely act in the future.
You cannot determine everything about a period or event just from the bound lord of the Ascendant,
but a bit of intelligent questioning and thinking should help you perceive the patterns and similarities
between recurring bound periods with the same planetary lord.
49
Jimi Hendrix
To illustrate how directing through the bounds is used with traditional methods of evaluating
condition, we will take a closer look at the Ascendant directions for the brief career of the wildly
creative and pioneering guitarist, Jimi Hendrix.
Johnny Allen Hendrix, November 27, 1942, 10:15 AM Seattle, WA. Rodden Rating AA.
I will be looking at the period of Hendrix's primary musical creativity and fame, through to his
untimely death. 
Z (Capricornus)Venus D --> Asc 20.080430 1962.12.26
In late 1962 the Ascendant directed into the bounds of Venus in mid Capricorn, so we start by looking
at the location and condition of Venus in the natal chart.
Venus in Sagittarius in the first house is the ruler of his Midheaven. Venus is ruled by Jupiter which is
in its exaltation in Cancer, conjunct the Moon in rulership in Cancer. Venus is part of a three planet
conjunction of Mercury, Sun and Venus, and all three are in the rulership, triplicity and bounds of
Jupiter. Jupiter controls three of the five dignities for those planets, so the influence of Jupiter is
overwhelming here.
50

It is that strong Jupiter/Moon combination in the water sign Cancer, influencing the three planet
cluster in the first house, which accounts for the wild, strongly emotional nature of Hendrix's work.
The ruling Jupiter is averse the Ascendant, meaning it does not make any whole sign aspect, so there is
an out of control quality to his music. 
This period, beginning in 1962 after his honorable discharge from the US Army, is the beginning of his
musical career.
During this period the partner planet is Saturn, since the last major aspect that the Ascendant made is
an opposition to Saturn in Gemini in the seventh house. Ascendant in opposition to Saturn suggests
Hendrix's opposition to any kind of restriction or restraint, and his emphasis on a wild and
unrestrained freedom. That theme runs through all of his musical creations.
Z Sextile Mars D --> Asc 23.275900 1966.03.08
Things really took off for Hendrix in the Venus bound period beginning in 1966, when the
participating planet switched from Saturn to Mars. In shorthand notation, the Ascendant moved from
Venus/Saturn to Venus/Mars.
Mars is quite strong in his rulership in Scorpio, but is in the twelfth house of self-undoing, and is also
averse the Ascendant. Mix Venus (ruled by Jupiter) and Mars (who rules himself and tolerates no
restraint, thank you very much) and you get the wild, crazy, borderline out of control intensity of his
best music. 
The trio that was the Jimi Hendrix Experience is the most successful band he ever had, with Mitch
Mitchell his best drummer. Mars as partner planet represents supporting or contributing people, and
in this case it could represent his band, especially the drummer. Since Mars is in the 12th house it
could point to a self-destructive streak, and it could also speak to enemies out of his awareness who
were working against him. That last point is just conjecture on my part.
This period represents the peak of his musical career, his climb to worldwide fame with the Jimi
Hendrix Experience, and his best recorded musical work. 
All of the albums released in his lifetime except one were recorded during this period. 
Z (Capricornus)Saturn D --> Asc 27.129650 1970.01.13
In 1970 the Ascendant moved into the bounds of Saturn. Saturn is problematic in this chart, being
retrograde in the seventh house and in a mutually applying opposition to the three planet cluster in the
first house. With mutual application you have three planets here moving forward to meet Saturn who
is moving backward to meet them. Traditionally mutual application is bad news with any two planets,
and more so with a malefic. In this period we have Saturn as bound lord with Mars as the partner, the
two malefics in control.
51
Hendrix's best work was behind him at this point, and he had only a short time left to live.
The final album released by Hendrix (Band of Gypsies, 1970) was recorded in January 1970, right
around the time of change of bound lord. This album was marked by a complete change of band, and
the album is generally not rated as being at the same level as his previous recordings. For me it does
not have the same fire and craziness of his peak work - Hendrix is nearly always good, but it is not his
best work.
It is during the first year after the Ascendant entered the Saturn bound period that Hendrix died,
September 18, 1970.
52
Anita Bryant
Anita Bryant was famous as a singer and Miss Oklahoma beauty pageant winner, and for many years
she was brand ambassador for the Florida Citrus Commission and orange juice. She scored four Top
40 hits in the United States in the late 1950s and early 1960s, including "Paper Roses", which reached
#5 on the charts.
Today Bryant is most remembered as an outspoken opponent of gay rights, and for her 1977 "Save Our
Children" campaign to repeal a local ordinance in Dade County, Florida, that prohibited
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. This involvement significantly damaged her
popularity and career in show business.
This is an example where just looking at the directing of the Ascendant through the bounds correlates
with the main ups and downs of her life.
The Ascendant in this chart is Leo, ruled by the Sun, and the Sun is exalted in Aries in the 9th house,
near the top of the chart. The Sun is in the same sign as Jupiter, and is in the Jupiter bounds, and
Jupiter has dignity by triplicity in Aries. Even with Jupiter being very near the Sun, with their shared
53

dignity the two planets do work well together, and Jupiter likely adds an expansive quality to the Sun's
expression. (I suspect maybe just a teeny tiny bit of inflated sense of self-wonderfulness.) Since the
Ascendant is ruled by the Sun, one of the most positive and visible planets in her chart, it makes sense
that the directions of the Ascendant should correlate with her public life and general fortune.
Z Sextile Moon D --> Asc 13.926553 1954.02.27
Z (Virgo)Venus D --> Asc 17.514411 1957.09.29
Starting in 1957 the Ascendant is directed to the bounds of Venus, in the middle of Virgo, with Moon as
participator. Venus is very strong in this chart in her ruling sign Taurus, in the terms of Jupiter, and
angular in the tenth house very near the Midheaven, so we should expect this Venus period to be very
positive. Sure enough, this is the period when she first became famous as a beauty queen - Venus in
Rulership right on the Midheaven + Sun ruler of Ascendant exalted = shining beauty.
In 1958 at age 18 Bryant became Miss Oklahoma, and in 1959 she took second place in the Miss
America pageant. She also had a moderately successful singing career, and all of her most popular
singles and albums were released during this period. Venus bounds were very positive for her.
Bryant also married in 1960 during this period, and had 4 children. There could be a connection
between the marriage and her children, and the Moon being the participating planet. (Note that the
Moon is opposite Saturn - we will comment on that again later.)
Z (Virgo)Jupiter D --> Asc 29.714593 1969.12.11
In 1969 the Ascendant moved into the bounds of Jupiter. Also in 1969 Bryant became a spokeswoman
for the Florida Citrus Commission, and nationally televised commercials featured her singing "Come
to the Florida Sunshine Tree" with the tag line "Breakfast without orange juice is like a day without
Sunshine." Sunshine - think Sun exalted in Aries, and the relationship between Sun and Jupiter in the
same sign.
Z Opposition Mercury D --> Asc 30.135445 1970.05.14
Z Trine Venus D --> Asc 32.602552 1972.10.31
Z (Virgo)Mars D --> Asc 34.576507 1974.10.22
In 1974 the Ascendant went into the terms of Mars, with Venus now the participating planet. Mars is
poorly placed in his detriment in Taurus, still in the tenth house, so it highly visible, and note that
Mars rules her ninth house of religion. This is a day chart, and Mars is often problematic in day charts,
and being in its detriment we can expect it to be argumentative and contentious. It was during this
period that she became involved in anti-gay activism starting in 1977, driven by her conservative
religions convictions. This cost her much of her public reputation, and that eventually led to her losing
her position as spokesperson for the Florida Citrus Commission in 1979.
54
Z Trine Mars D --> Asc 39.940388 1980.03.03
It was when the Ascendant was in the bounds of Mars with Mars also as partner, that she went through
her divorce - and a contentious divorce fits a Mars partner. It also fits that she says the divorce was for
reasons of abuse - think ill-tempered and ill-controlled Mars, and recall that her Moon in the fourth
house (participating planet when she married) is opposite Saturn, lord of the seventh house. 
This divorce alienated a lot of the Christian fundamentalist support base that had stayed with her
during the anti-gay incidents, so her career and popularity went downhill from here.
Z (Virgo)Saturn D --> Asc 43.070300 1983.04.20
Z (Libra)Saturn D --> Asc 45.495497 1985.09.22
Her second marriage took place in 1990 under Saturn bounds for Ascendant, with Mars still the
participator. Saturn rules her natal seventh house, Aquarius. I suspect that the second marriage was at
least partly for convention and to honor tradition since she was a very conservative Christian, and it is
just more proper for a woman to be married.
Z Opposition Sun D --> Asc 51.644306 1991.11.16
Z (Libra)Mercury D --> Asc 52.772650 1993.01.01
Her bankruptcy took place in 1997 during Mercury bounds. Mercury is the weakest planet in her chart,
in Detriment and Fall in Pisces in the weak and ineffective eighth house, and retrograde. Mercury also
rules her second house of finances.
(Note that eighth house is specifically linked with bankruptcy in vedic astrology, and it fits the general
traditional Western sense as also being related to lawsuits concerning money.)
55
Herman Melville
Today Herman Melville is considered to be one of the greatest writers in America's history, and his
landmark (or, perhaps, sea-mark) book, Moby Dick, is considered one of the great novels of all time.
During his lifetime he had only a brief period of popularity. Much of his writing career was
accompanied with increasing popular and critical disfavor, fostering disillusion and depression on
Melville's part. The directions of the Ascendant for Melville follow the ups and downs of the central
part of his career.
Mercury in this chart is very strong in terms of essential dignity in Virgo, in rulership and exaltation
and in Mercury bounds. It is in the positive fifth house, which is linked in modern astrology to
creativity like writing. However, note that Mercury has no influence or dignity on either of the angles.
Mercury rules the peregrine Mars in the second house, and we will see the Mercury/Mars connection
show up in some of the directions. The second house is Gemini, ruled by Mercury, and for most of his
life Melville made his living in Mercury professions - most notably, as a writer. When his writing
career fell apart he became a lecturer, and then spent most of the rest of his life as a government clerk,
which is also a Mercurial profession.
56

Saturn is by far most difficult planet in the chart. This is a night chart, where Saturn is especially
malefic. Saturn is also in his fall in Aries in the twelfth house. We have themes here of being ignored or
miSunderstood, of hidden enemies out to get him, and also of self-undoing, where it is his own actions
that alienate people. Saturn rules his ninth house of publishing, travel, religion and religious or
spiritual quests, and also his tenth house of career and reputation.
The combination of rulers of the sign Capricorn in the ninth house is very interesting. We have the
main sign ruler Saturn (his very Saturnine mature writings and philosophy) with Mars exalted there
(the wanderlust, the quest, also the compulsive urge to be writing about the quest).
Z (Gemini)Venus D --> Asc 17.444397 1837.01.10
Z Trine Jupiter D --> Asc 18.089303 1837.09.03
It is during this Venus/Jupiter period that Melville first goes to sea, in 1839.
Z Opposition Moon D --> Asc 21.618956 1841.03.15
Z (Gemini)Mars D --> Asc 22.200195 1841.10.13
We will see a recurring connection with Mars and travel in later Mars periods. It was in this period
during his second sea voyage in this period that he was captured by cannibals in Polynesia and spent
four months with them before escaping. This experience became the basis for his first two novels,
which began his popular fame as a writer. He first made his name in stories (Mercury) of his
wanderings and adventures (Mars) around the world.
Melville wrote the two novels that were the most popular during his lifetime, Typee in 1846 and Omoo
in 1847, in a Mars period. Mars is in his second house in Gemini which is ruled by Mercury. The
partner planet here is the Moon, in the eighth house in Sagittarius, applying to conjunction with
Uranus and Neptune, and completely dominated by Jupiter as far as dignity. I wonder whether that
Mars opposition to Moon/Uranus/Neptune is part of what contributed to the flavor of the wild and
exotic sea adventures in his popular fiction.
Also, Melville's sea stories are very Mars ruled by Mercury in flavor - the wayfaring male wanderer
having his adventures - and almost all the characters are men.
Z (Gemini)Saturn D --> Asc 29.244384 1848.10.29
Melville's later books, from Mardi through Pierre in this period, became increasingly serious and
philosophical - and increasingly less popular. This is also the period where his work took on a much
more saturnine tone, and where he became increasingly convinced he had enemies in the publishing
industry that were working against him.
We have some complex and interesting symbolism of a malefic Saturn in the twelfth house at work
here - the hidden enemies in publishing he was convinced were out to destroy him - his own self-
destructive tendencies in how he dealt with some of his writing - and the deep metaphysical and
57
philosophical themes with an increasingly dark, disillusioned and even nihilistic tone in the later
works, that alienated his earlier audience. I also think that this twelfth house Saturn in fall was evident
in his increasingly bleak mature spiritual quest and philosophy. My own sense is that this Saturn in fall
is embodied in the character Captain Ahab in Moby Dick.
And it was, indeed, during this period, in 1851, that Melville published this masterpiece, Moby Dick,
which was a complete critical and popular failure at the time. 
This whole period, in which Melville's writing career declined and fell apart, was in the bounds of
Saturn, 1848 through 1855. In 1855 the Ascendant moved into Mars bounds with Saturn the
participator.
Z (Cancer)Mars D --> Asc 35.630887 1855.03.20
Z Square Saturn D --> Asc 36.079988 1855.08.31
It was in 1857, after his novel The Confidence Man was published and was another critical and popular
failure that Melville quit writing and went on a 3 year lecture tour. Again we see Mars bounds
connected to traveling. In addition, Melville's 9th house of travel is Capricorn, with Saturn ruler and
Mars exalted, and this lecture tour took place when the pair was the bound lord and partner.
Saturn may have added a depth and profundity to Melville's thought and writing, but it had a very
harsh negative affect on his career during his lifetime.
58
Harry Belafonte
In this example I want to look at the chart of Harry Belafonte, singer, actor and civil rights activist.
This particular example will include directing the Midheaven, and how it interacts with the profection
for a particularly critical and beneficial year in Belafonte's life.
The outstanding feature of this chart is the very tight conjunction of the Sun and Jupiter in Pisces, in
the 10th house. The conjunction is exact to within 9 minutes of orb, and this is called cazimi, or at the
heart of the Sun, and it is considered about the most propitious place that a planet could be. Add the
fact that the conjunction takes place in Pisces, where Jupiter is in rulership, and you have a very
powerful, rare and positive configuration, right in the 10th house of career and reputation. At his peak
Belafonte had an amazing charisma and magnetism, and was also very handsome.
Note also the angular Mars in the first house, just above the Ascendant is in an applying opposition
with Saturn in Sagittarius in the 7th house. I associate this Mars/Saturn opposition with Belafonte's
very outspoken speaking and action on civil rights, and I associate the extremely dignified Jupiter with
what he would call his 'moral compass' - he had very strong beliefs concerning civil rights, and he was
completely consistent in his words and actions, including putting his life and reputation on the line for
his civil rights work. Note also that both Saturn and Mars are in a pretty tight square to that
Sun/Jupiter conjunction - Belafonte primarily used his fame as a way to further his civil rights work. 
59

Looking at the Midheaven, note that it is in the 9th house in Aquarius, a sign ruled by Saturn. The
Midheaven is also in the triplicity and bounds of Jupiter. Since the Midheaven will be directed counter
clockwise, it makes sense to pay attention to when it reaches the Sun/Jupiter conjunction. And finally,
note that the Jupiter bounds in Pisces are just slightly after the Venus bounds where Jupiter and the
Sun are, so that the Midheaven will be in these Jupiter bounds shortly after its conjunction with Sun
and Jupiter.
Here are the directions for the Midheaven for the period we are looking at. 
Z (Pisces)Venus D --> MC 15.153138 1942.04.26
Z Square Mars D --> MC 18.933662 1946.02.05
Z Square Saturn D --> MC 22.199317 1949.05.12
Z Jupiter D --> MC 24.512766 1951.09.04
Z Sun D --> MC 24.649753 1951.10.24
That Midheaven directed to conjunct Sun and Jupiter in 1951, and stayed the participating planets all
the way through 1967. (Strictly speaking the Sun is the participator, but since the two planets are so
tightly conjunct we can effectively view the pair as being participators.) In 1951 the Midheaven is still
in the bounds of Venus.
Z (Pisces)Jupiter D --> MC 26.463376 1953.08.17
Z (Pisces)Mercury D --> MC 30.177944 1957.05.04
Z (Pisces)Mars D --> MC 32.950857 1960.02.11
The Midheaven entered the bounds of Jupiter, with Sun/Jupiter participating, in 1953, and stayed
there until mid 1957 when it entered the bounds of Mercury. (Note that the Midheaven went into the
bounds of Mars in 1960, which is the beginning of his most serious civil rights activism.)
The peak period, where his career took off and he ascended to worldwide fame,
coincides exactly with the Jupiter bound period for the directed Midheaven, with Sun
and Jupiter together the participators, from 1953 through mid 1957 . Here is some
biographical information for this period.
Debuting on Broadway in 1953, Belafonte won a Tony Award for his performance in John Murray
Anderson's Almanac, in which he performed several of his own songs. He also appeared in another
well-received musical revue, 3 for Tonight, in 1955.
Around this time, Belafonte launched his film career. He played a school principal opposite Dorothy
Dandridge in his first movie, Bright Road (1953). The pair reunited the following year for Otto
Preminger's Carmen Jones, a film adaptation of the Broadway musical. Oscar Hammerstein II had
written the musical as a contemporary, African-American version of the opera Carmen, by Georges
Bizet. Belafonte received an Academy Award nomination for his portrayal of Joe, a soldier who falls
for the title character, played by Dandridge.
60
The success of Carmen Jones made Belafonte a star, and soon he became a music sensation. After
signing with RCA Victor Records, he released Calypso (1956), an album featuring his take on
traditional Caribbean folk music. "The Banana Boat Song (Day-O)" proved to be a huge hit. 
This was the first vinyl album in recording history to sell more than one million copies.
Here I want to look at the solar return and profected chart for the year 1956, which is the year that the
album Calypso! was released and Belafonte rose to worldwide fame. 1956 was the peak of the peak.
For this example I am primarily interested in the condition of the two planets, the Sun and Jupiter,
since those are the planets that are active in the directions.
Here is the profected chart for 1956. Note that the Sun/Jupiter conjunction is in Leo, the sign of the
Sun's rulership, so it is especially strong in this year's profected chart. This coincides with its special
strength in the Midheaven directions. Also note that Mars on the Ascendant has profected to Scorpio,
and Moon on the Midheaven has profected to Cancer, both being the signs of their rulership, so those
two planets will likely be particularly helpful and effective during this period. 
In this case the directions are extremely positive, and the profections very strongly supported and
fulfilled that positive character.  The very strong directions of a very strong point in the chart,
supported by the very strong profections, was enough to make this the year that Belafonte's worldwide
musical career went nova.
61

Transits
Not all transits are equal in impact. The system that we have been examining here provides a context
to help decide which transits are likely to be the most important. The same general principle applies
that we have used throughout.
Transits which align with the general directions of the predictive systems will likely
have the biggest effect.
Any planet, point or house that is particularly emphasized in the directions and other charts should be
watched in transits. Transits of that point, and transits to that point, are both important.
These are points that should be watched.
1) Transits of the LOY in the natal chart and in the solar return.
2) Transits to the LOY in the natal chart and in the solar return.
3) Transits through the profected sign of the year, especially by planets which are otherwise
emphasized. Transits through the stakes, the signs in square and opposition to the profected sign of
the year, can also be significant. All four of those signs are activated by the profection.
4) Transits to the solar return Ascendant of the year, and transits through the SR first house.
5) Eclipses on any of the above points also take on extra significance. Planets stationing and changing
direction on any of those points, especially by the slower moving planets, are especially strong.
Along with these points, which are specific for a given time period, there are other transits I always
watch. I pay attention to the transits of the slow moving planets, from Saturn on out, whenever they
make hard aspects to the personal planets (Sun, Moon, Mercury, Venus) or to the angles. I find that
Saturn transits in particular are always important, and I mark what house Saturn is moving through,
and whenever Saturn changes signs.
62
LOY and Transits - Charles Obert
In this example I want to use the solar return and profections for myself for the most recent year, 2017,
and show how the two together related to what was the most significant transit of the year. This shows
my natal chart in the center surrounded by the profections for 2017 in the outside wheel.
The profected sign of year is Gemini, and the profected house is the sixth, which is a house of illness.
The profected LOY is Mercury, the ruler of Gemini.
Looking at the profected chart as a whole against my natal, there are a couple of close conjunctions
that gave me pause. Profected Pluto is sitting right on my natal Ascendant, the profected Sun is sitting
right on natal Pluto, and Profected Saturn is very close to my natal Sun. That shows two stressful hits
involving my Sun, and two stressful hits involving Pluto. I pay attention to redundant aspects. When
aspects like that show up only in the profected chart I question how important they are, but I note
them when they correlate to qualities in the solar return chart and in other directions.
As it turns out, there is a significant correlation involving Pluto, which we will see later on.
63

This chart shows the solar return for the year 2017. 
First note the rising sign is Scorpio ruled by Mars, and the SR Mars is in the sixth house - so again we
see a sixth house connection. There is also a first and sixth house connection by rulership in two ways -
the ruler of the sixth house, Mars, is in the first house, and also rules the first. First plus sixth house
could equate to me getting sick. Fortunately, Mars in the sixth is in Aries in his rulership where he is
strong, so that is good. Mars is in a cardinal fire sign which could correlate to some sort of acute or
sharp illness, probably painful but not of long duration, and one that would likely turn out okay given
Mars being in good condition in both my solar return and in my natal chart. The sharpness of it might
be accentuated by Mars being loosely conjunct Uranus, but that is a five degree separating orb so I
don't weigh it very highly.
LOY Mercury is in the fifth house in Pisces, in detriment and fall, but Mercury is also cazimi, just six
minutes from exact conjunction from the Sun. Being cazimi greatly strengthens and greatly
emphasizes Mercury, so I expect Mercurial activities to be important this year, possibly involving fifth
house matters like creativity. (In my case I was 65 this year and not in a relationship, so it would be
unreasonable to expect me to have a child.)
64

This next chart shows the solar return in a bi-wheel around my natal chart.
I mentioned the Pluto correlation with my Ascendant in the profected chart, and here in the SR chart
Pluto is sitting right on my Ascendant, tightly conjunct. Time to sit up and take notice. I've worked
enough with the outer planets to have a healthy respect for them, so in this case I expect a year of some
far reaching changes, possibly involving health challenges. 
Also note that solar return Moon is sitting tightly conjunct natal Uranus in the seventh house. The
Moon often correlates to health issues, and in my case Moon in Cancer often means digestive issues.
The seventh house location could also indicate relationship issues, but that is not emphasized
anywhere else.
The next chart flips the two wheels, and puts the solar return in the middle with the natal chart around
it. The house structure and angles of the solar return are emphasized in that view.
65

In this chart LOY Mercury in the outer ring is at very late Pisces, just about to enter the sixth house
when it moves to zero degree Aries. My natal Mars is rising in the SR chart, so again we have the first
and sixth house connection. A significant transit to that Mercury triggered a major health event that
ended up setting a big part of my agenda for the first part of the year.
The Sun entered Aries, moving into the SR sixth house and transiting my natal Mercury who is LOY, at
the beginning of Spring in late March. That coincided with the peak of a series of gall bladder attacks
over a three day period that was the first major illness I have had in many years. It also marked the
beginning of a several month period in which I severely controlled my diet, cleared up the gall bladder
problems, and lost a great deal of weight. That sort of strict self-discipline fits with SR ruler Mars being
in the SR sixth house, and with that same Mars in my natal chart rising in the SR chart since it affected
my physical self.
Regarding LOY Mercury being cazimi, the entire year was very important and active in terms of
reading new material and doing a great deal of writing. Philosophically I was drawn to Mars kinds of
individualistic and libertarian of writers, so Mars set much of the tone for my reading.
66

Yearly Solar Return Directions
For the solar return, directions are done for the Ascendant, moving it all the way around the wheel of
the signs for the year. Within the space of that year the directed Ascendant moves through all the signs
and makes all possible aspects to the planets in the chart.
The free program Morinus can create the listing of annual solar return directions, and I think you will
find that running a listing for a solar return of your own will help clarify how they work.
The following example listing illustrates how the annual directions work.
Z (Scorpio)Venus D --> Asc 2017.03.07
Z (Scorpio)Mercury D --> Asc 2017.03.12
Z Trigon Mercury D --> Asc 2017.03.20
Z (Scorpio)Jupiter D --> Asc 2017.03.22
Z (Scorpio)Saturn D --> Asc 2017.03.29
Z (Sagittarius)Jupiter D --> Asc 2017.04.06
Z (Sagittarius)Venus D --> Asc 2017.04.21
Z Quadrat Mercury D --> Asc 2017.04.27
Z (Sagittarius)Mercury D --> Asc 2017.04.27
Z (Sagittarius)Saturn D --> Asc 2017.05.02
Z (Sagittarius)Mars D --> Asc 2017.05.07
Z Trigon Mars D --> Asc 2017.05.09
Z (Capricornus)Mercury D --> Asc 2017.05.12
Z (Capricornus)Jupiter D --> Asc 2017.05.19
Z (Capricornus)Venus D --> Asc  2017.05.26
Z Sextil Mercury D --> Asc 2017.05.29
Z (Capricornus)Saturn D --> Asc 2017.06.03
Z (Capricornus)Mars D --> Asc 2017.06.06
Z Quadrat Mars D --> Asc 2017.06.08
Z (Aquarius)Mercury D --> Asc 2017.06.10
Z (Aquarius)Venus D --> Asc 2017.06.16
Z (Aquarius)Jupiter D --> Asc 2017.06.20
Z (Aquarius)Mars D --> Asc 2017.06.25
Z (Aquarius)Saturn D --> Asc 2017.06.28
Z Sextil Mars D --> Asc 2017.06.30
This is a portion of the annual directions listing
from my own solar return chart for the year 2017.
My birthday is March 7 and the solar return
Ascendant is in Scorpio, so the annual directions
start in the bounds of Venus in Scorpio on that
date, and move to Mercury bounds on March 12.
On March 20 the Ascendant made a trine aspect to
Mercury.
The direction changed signs on April 6, when it
moved into the bounds of Jupiter in Sagittarius.
The Ascendant moved through Sagittarius in April
and early May, also making a square aspect to
Mercury around April 27 and a trine to Mars on
May 9.
On May 12 the directed Ascendant changed signs
again, moving into the Mercury bounds in
Capricorn. It moved through the various bounds in
Capricorn through May and into early June,
changing signs again on June 10 when it moved
into the Mercury bounds of Aquarius.
The directions continue in this way, going all the
way around the chart in the space of the year,
returning back to Venus bounds in Scorpio on
March 7 of the next year.
67
Important Points in Yearly Directions
As with transits, the important directions to look for are those involving the profected sign and planets
activated for the year.
Note the direction of the Ascendant to the LOY by aspect.  This includes the LOY in both the
natal and the SR. The major aspects are used - conjunction, opposition, square, trine - and
traditionally sextile is not included. I am finding that the hard aspects are more likely to be significant
than are trines.
Note the direction of the Ascendant through the profected sign of the year, and to the
signs in square or opposition.  This includes the signs of the same mode - so for example, if the
profected sign is cardinal then directions through any of the cardinal signs are important.
Those are the general rules featured in the traditional literature. I am finding that, like everything else,
the important directions depend on which planets and houses are standing out that year, including any
significant aspect patterns in the solar return. For instance, if the most important configuration in the
SR chart is a strong square or opposition, direction to the points in that pattern by conjunction can
mark critical events.
The traditional points listed above are most likely to be significant when those points are also involved
in major aspect configurations or are angular in the SR chart.
For really significant events you are likely to see significant transits and significant directions
coinciding in time, sometimes to the same point.
On the following page is an illustration of how the yearly directions work, using my solar return chart
for the year 2017. This shows how I work with charts in my practice - I print out the solar return wheel
of the year, by itself with the bounds, and in a bi-wheel with the natal chart, and mark the dates the
directed Ascendant changes signs around the rim. This makes it easier for me to graphically time the
directions.
In this example Gemini is the profected sign of the year, so Mercury is Lord of the Year. This means
that exact aspects by the directed Ascendant to either natal or SR Mercury mark significant times.  It
also means that periods when the Ascendant directs through Gemini and the other mutable signs mark
times of increased significant activity relative to the theme of the year.
68
This is a bi-wheel, with my 2017 solar return chart on the inside, and the natal on the outside. I have
put the dates in the year that the SR Ascendant changes signs outside the rim.
The listing below shows excerpts from the annual directions for two periods during the year. The
Ascendant starts at its SR location at 6 degrees Scorpio and moves around the wheel from there.  I
marked the lines of a change of signs, and of an exact aspect to Mercury, in bold.  The directed
Ascendant entered Sagittarius around April 6, and entered Pisces around July 2. It made an exact
square aspect to SR Mercury on April 27, and an exact conjunction on July 12. 
(Sagittarius)Jupiter D --> Asc 2017.04.06
(Sagittarius)Venus D --> Asc 2017.04.21
Quadrat Mercury D --> Asc 2017.04.27
(Sagittarius)Mercury D --> Asc 2017.04.27
(Sagittarius)Saturn D --> Asc 2017.05.02
...
(Pisces)Venus D --> Asc 2017.07.02
(Pisces)Jupiter D --> Asc 2017.07.09
(Pisces)Mercury D --> Asc 2017.07.12
Mercury D --> Asc 2017.07.12
69

This next diagram has the solar return chart by itself, in a wheel that also shows the bounds around the
outside edge, so it is easier to graphically watch the bound rulers change. Again I have marked the
dates the directed Ascendant changes signs around the edge. I have also marked the natal position of
the LOY Mercury, at 29 Pisces, in the outer rim of the chart with the letters ME.
The profected sign of the year is Gemini, and LOY is Mercury, so directions to the mutable signs and to
Mercury are especially important. 
The period during April, when the Ascendant directed through the mutable sign, Sagittarius, I was
very busy reworking my diet and recovering from a serious illness. 
The period in July, when the Ascendant directed through the mutable sign Pisces, I started a major
new teaching, writing and reading project that set the theme for the rest of my year's work. Both of
those periods also included major aspects to the SR Mercury location (by square from Sagittarius, by
conjunction in Pisces), so they were significant by both sign and by aspect to the Lord of the Year.
70

Franklin D Roosevelt
In this section we are going to look at a significant year in the life of Franklin D Roosevelt, who was
elected President of the United States in 1932 and guided the country through the years of the Great
Depression and into World War II, dying in 1945, the year the war ended.
The year we will look at is 1921, the year he contracted the disease that left him paralyzed from the
waist down for the rest of his life.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, January 30, 1882, 8:45 PM, Hyde Park, New York. Rodden Rating AA.
We are going to look at the chart to find evidence of the potential for the paralytic disease. (Note that
in a later chapter I talk about the usefulness of approaching a chart or a reading with a defined theme
or question, to draw out useful data relevant to that theme.) That evidence shows the seeds of
potential, and we should see those seeds sprouting by being prominent in the predictive data for 1921,
the year he fell ill.
71

The logical place to start for questions of illness is the sixth house, and Roosevelt has three of the inner
planets there, the Sun, Venus and Mercury. None of the three is strong - the Sun is peregrine and in
detriment, Venus has dignity by face only and is greatly weakened by being combust, approaching the
Sun, with no reception to soften the condition. Mercury has dignity by triplicity in air signs.
And - the sixth house is ruled by the peregrine malefic Saturn in Taurus, part of the four planet
stellium in the ninth house with Pluto, Jupiter and Neptune.
All three of those sixth house planets are stressed by hard aspects to difficult planets, squares from the
stellium in Taurus in the ninth house. Venus is in a very tight applying square, within two minutes of
exact, with Saturn. Fortunately Saturn and Venus have a very strong mutual reception by both
rulership and triplicity, and that takes a lot of the hard edge off of that aspect.
The Sun is less fortunate, being in a hard applying square with Neptune in Taurus. Hard aspects to
Neptune can manifest as health issues that are weakening and debilitating, and Neptune health
problems are often mysterious and hard to diagnose - note that there is disagreement to this day as to
exactly what disease Roosevelt contracted.  Since Roosevelt's illness has the marks of a Neptune
disease, we should expect a badly stressed Sun in the predictive material, and it would be confirming
to find that as a stressed aspect from Neptune as in the natal.
Mercury also has a very stressed aspect, a tight mutually applying square to Pluto retrograde in
Taurus. Mercury is associated with diseases of the nervous system, and that fits Roosevelt's ailment
also. We can expect stressed Mercury in the predictive data.
It is worth noting that Mercury also has a tight trine with Mars, who is retrograde and strong on the
Midheaven. Since this is a trine and Mercury rules Mars, this is not as negative an aspect.
Whenever there are questions of health it is always worth keeping the Moon in mind. The Moon in this
chart is pretty strong, being in her rulership in Cancer and near enough to the Midheaven to be
angular - think of Roosevelt's homey, personable fireside chats on the radio while he was president.
The Moon is in a tight sextile with Saturn in Taurus, and there is one-way reception there - Saturn is in
the exaltation and triplicity of Taurus, but the Moon is in Saturn's detriment. Note that Venus, Saturn
and the Moon are all at six degrees - that can be significant when the chart is rotated in profections,
because those planets will repeatedly end up right on top of each other by the profected movement.
We can expect that the stressful planets in the Taurus stellium will show up in the data for the illness.
---
We will start our examination of the 1921 data by looking at the profected chart for the year, seeing
where the profected sign of the year is, and how the profected chart in general lines up with the natal
chart.
72
This wheel shows his natal chart in the center, with the profected chart for that year around the
outside edge.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, January 30, 1882, 8:45 pm, Hyde Park, NY. Rodden Rating AA.
The profected sign of the year is Sagittarius, ruled by Jupiter, and profected Jupiter is in the 12th
house which is also associated with illness. The entire Taurus stellium has rotated around to
the twelfth house, and is sitting opposite the three planets in the natal sixth.
Natal Mercury is exactly opposite profected Pluto, and profected Mercury is conjunct
natal Pluto.   Redundant markers like this are important, especially since this reflects the tight
square between Mercury and Pluto in the natal chart.
Profected Mars is rising  conjunct the Ascendant in Virgo, a sign ruled by Mercury in the sixth
house. Recall that Mars and Mercury are in a tight trine in the natal. Mars being on the Midheaven in
the natal, this could be a marker for political prominence or activity, or for the stress of illness. 
73

Most ominously, natal Sun is opposite profected Neptune 6th to 12th house, and natal
Neptune is conjunct profected Sun in the 9th  - two stressed Sun/Neptune aspects between the
charts, reflecting the stressed Sun/Neptune square in the natal chart. 
Also note that natal Venus is exactly opposite profected Saturn, and natal Saturn is
conjunct profected Venus. 
There are three planets in Roosevelt's natal sixth house - Sun, Venus and Mercury -
and all three of them are stressed in multiple ways in this profected chart. 
Just in general, every time this profected chart came around in Roosevelt's life there would be
potential for illness. Roosevelt died in 1945, 24 years later, when this same profected chart was active.
This next chart is the solar return for the year 1921.
Aquarius is rising, ruled by Saturn - Aquarius is Roosevelt's natal sixth house. LOY Jupiter is in
detriment in the 8th house which can relate to illness, conjunct  the SR Ascendant ruler Saturn. Mars
74

is in Pisces, separating from opposition to Jupiter and applying to opposition to Saturn - so both
malefics are involved in hard aspects to each other and to the LOY.  
The Sun is opposite Neptune, which echoes the Sun/Neptune configurations in the
profected chart. There are two very difficult oppositions in the solar return chart, and they involve
two of the three stressed sixth house planets in Roosevelt's natal.
Also note that the solar return sixth house is Cancer, ruled by the Moon - and the Moon is in bad
shape, in fall in Scorpio.
This next chart is a bi-wheel with the natal chart in the center and SR in the second ring.
The SR Ascendant falls in the natal 6th house of illness, conjunct natal Mercury. SR Saturn is
retrograde sitting conjunct the natal Ascendant  in the first house and ruling natal the natal
sixth - Saturn transits to the Ascendant often mark health issues, and this is a three pass transit. The
ruler of the sixth house in the first is another marker for illness. Saturn is also conjunct LOY Jupiter on
the Ascendant, and Jupiter is further weakened by being retrograde and in detriment.
75

SR Pluto is retrograde in mutually applying conjunction with natal Moon in the 11th, and we noted
that the Moon is often associated with health issues. We also noted two significant aspects with Pluto
involving the profected chart.
This next wheel flips the two charts and puts the natal around the solar return.
Note that the SR Pluto to natal Moon conjunction falls in the SR sixth house . Natal Uranus
is conjunct SR LOY Jupiter in the eighth house, and the natal Ascendant is conjunct SR Saturn right
next to it. Natal Jupiter, LOY, is opposite SR Moon which is in fall in Scorpio. By sign, the SR Moon is
opposite the stressing Taurus stellium in the natal. The SR opposition of Mars to Jupiter and Saturn
falls right on the natal Ascendant/Descendant axis, and the natal Ascendant falls in the eighth house.
LOY Jupiter is stressed in the SR chart and is angular relative to the natal chart.
The next chart is a bi-wheel of the natal with chart with the transits for August 10, which is day he
became seriously ill and consulted a doctor. I drew the chart for noon, so I do not consider the
transiting angles to be important, but the planetary positions are valid.
76

Note especially the stellium of transiting planets in Leo in the natal 12th house - the
same sign and house as the stellium in the profected chart.  Transiting Mercury in the
twelfth is applying to a very tight conjunction to Mars, and the Sun is 4 degrees (4 days by transit) past
conjunction with Neptune in the 12th - so again we have a Sun/Neptune connection, with the Sun
transit being one of the likely triggers for the onset of the disease. Transiting Saturn is now moving
direct approaching tight conjunction with the Ascendant - since Saturn was retrograde in the SR it
made a triple pass over FDR's Ascendant that year. We already noted that Saturn rules FDR's natal
sixth house.
The primary directions active at this time are: Asc -Venus(Libra)/Sun,  MC -Saturn(Cancer)/Jupiter,
Sun - Mercury(Pisces)/Mercury, and Moon - Saturn(Leo)/Sun. These involve the same planets we
are seeing stressed in this group of charts. 
77

The Moon being in bounds of Saturn is especially significant.  Note that the directed Moon is opposite
the natal Sun from 12th to 6th house, very near the position of solar return and transiting Neptune.
This ties in with the transits in August when he became ill - the directed Moon is being transited
by the stellium in Leo opposite his natal sixth house the month he fell ill. 
Finally, we look at the annual directions of the SR Ascendant for the year. I am repeating the image of
the SR here, and then the list of directions. Around the chart is the position of the directed Sun, and of
the directed solar return Ascendant
78

Recall that the profected sign of the year is Sagittarius, LOY Jupiter. This means that Jupiter and the 
mutable signs are activated for the year and are sensitive points for the annual directions. Jupiter in 
detriment is conjunct Saturn in the SR 8th opposite SR Mars. Both Saturn and Jupiter are in the 
mutable sign Virgo, and Mars is in mutable Pisces.
Z (Virgo)Jupiter D --> Asc 182.907136 1921.08.05
Z Jupiter D --> Asc 183.814268 1921.08.06
Z Sextile Moon D --> Asc 185.740094 1921.08.07
Z Opposition Mars D --> Asc 187.097085 1921.08.09
Z (Virgo)Mars D --> Asc 188.009754 1921.08.10
Z Saturn D --> Asc 192.022628 1921.08.14
In early August the yearly directions reached Virgo and the SR eighth house, making 
aspects to Jupiter, to Saturn and to the axis of the Saturn/Mars opposition in the SR, and directly 
opposite the directed Sun. 
 
79
Margaret Thatcher
Margaret Thatcher, the "Iron Lady", was the first woman Prime Minister of England and the longest
serving PM in the 20th century, from 1975 to 1990. She was politically conservative, and her
leadership style was strong, severe and uncompromising.
Margaret Thatcher, October 13, 1925, 9 AM, Grantham, England. Rodden Rating A.
The obvious dominant planet in this chart is Saturn, sitting right on the Ascendant in Scorpio. Mars,
the Ascendant ruler, is a lot stronger and more important than it looks in first glance . Even in
detriment in Libra and in the 12th house, Mars has a strong mixed mutual reception with Saturn
(Saturn in Mars' rulership, Mars in Saturn's exaltation).  With the two planets averse (making no
aspect to each other), and three planets hidden away in the 12th house, I wonder how much of her
political work involved private back-room maneuvering out of the public eye.
There is another interesting configuration worth noting. The Moon is angular and strong in Leo about
5 degrees from the Midheaven, loosely conjunct Neptune. The Moon is ruled by the Sun, which is in
80

Libra in its fall in the twelfth house, conjunct Mercury, and sextile the Moon/Neptune pair. Planets in
fall are not heard, not respected, and the Sun being in the twelfth house emphasizes not being seen. It
is noteworthy that the Sun is sextile that very visible Leo Moon, pushing to get the recognition that its
ruler the Sun wants.
With the two planets Saturn and Mars being so important, we should expect to see them be strong and
emphasized during significantly positive years for Thatcher. That is exactly what we find.
Thatcher was elected Prime Minister in 1979. I want to start our study by looking at the primary
directions for that period. I added in the directions for Mars and Saturn to the usual four points. I also
show a chart wheel with the directed positions around the outside edge.
Asc - Saturn(Sag)/Mercury
MC - Mars(Scorpio)/Moon
Sun - Jupiter(Sag)/Venus
Moon - Mars(Libra)/Mercury
Mars - Saturn(Scorpio)/Jupiter
Saturn - Saturn(Sag)/Mercury
The dominance of Saturn and Mars is striking. The directed Ascendant, Mars and Saturn are all in
Saturn Bounds, and the MC is in Mars bounds. 
81

Directed Mars is in the first house along with Saturn, and I surmise that may increase the
communication and coordination between the two. Directions can mark periods where planets that are
averse in the natal chart are working together better. I also surmise that we could trace her rise to
power previous to the election as Mars was directing through the first house, hitting Saturn and then
the Ascendant.
It is also very striking that Thatcher was elected shortly after the Midheaven directed into
her first house. The Midheaven directing into the house representing herself is an obvious marker
for rising to prominence and power. 
Notice the interesting and suggestive aspect configuration shown between the directed planets and the
Leo Moon up at the top of the chart conjunct the Midheaven and Neptune. These are marked outside
the wheel in the preceding chart.
1) The directed Moon is now sitting on the Sun Mercury conjunction and is sextile natal Moon.
2) The directed Ascendant and Saturn are both now trine that natal Moon and sextile directed Moon
and natal Sun/Mercury.
3) Directed Mars is now square that same natal Moon/Neptune.
That strikes me as forming a powerful aspect pattern, all the directed planets working together to
highlight that elevated Moon so that it gets the attention it is craving.
82
This is her profected chart for 1979, the year she was elected - I ran the profection for 1978 since she
was born late in the year, and the election was in May.
The profected sign of the year is Aries, so the LOY is Mars.  Aries is a cardinal sign, and all of the other
cardinal signs are also activated because of their hard aspect to Aries. These are called the signs in the
stakes to Aries, those signs that are square or opposite.
Aries is opposite Libra, the sign where natal Mars resides, so Mars is additionally activated by being in
the stakes with the profected sign.
Also note that profected Mars is angular, near the natal Midheaven/IC axis.
83

This is the Solar Return for 1978.
The rising sign is Libra, where natal Mars resides, and Libra is also activated by the profection. LOY
Mars is strong in his rulership in Scorpio. Note the tight opposition Moon to Saturn, sixth to twelfth
house. 
There is a major mixed mutual reception between Saturn and Mercury, but averse, out of contact. I
keep thinking that there likely was a good amount of behind the scenes political scheming that went on
to help get Thatcher elected.
LOY Mars, in Scorpio, is also conjunct Uranus, and is in a wide separating conjunction with the SR
Ascendant ruler Venus. The rising planet in the chart is Pluto, which is conjunct her Sun. 
Thatcher's Sun is in its fall in Libra, and planets in fall often feel like they are not given the attention,
credit and respect they deserve, so they can overcompensate by demanding attention and respect.
This solar return chart will look a lot more significant when we view it combined with her natal chart.
84

This wheel has the natal in the inner ring and the 1978 SR in the outer.
When we put the two charts one on the other, both Mars and Saturn are angular. SR Mars is conjunct
her natal Ascendant as is SR Uranus, and SR Saturn is 6 degrees from the Midheaven. The mutual
reception between Mercury and Saturn takes on more importance with Saturn's prominence.
Natal Jupiter is also strong in the SR chart, being in the tenth house conjunct the SR North Node
which amplifies its effect.
The strong Moon Saturn opposition is now tightly angular along her natal Midheaven axis, and the
Moon is making a strong applying trine to SR Mars and her natal Ascendant. 
85

This next wheel shows the Election Day chart in a bi-wheel with the natal. The election was May 3,
1979. I ran the chart for noon, so I don't place heavy emphasis on the angles in the outer wheel.
Note LOY Mars is again in his rulership, having moved to his other sign Aries, and Aries is the
profected sign of the year. Transits by the LOY through the profected sign mark key periods and
events. At election time Mercury and Mars are conjunct and are making an opposition to natal Sun and
Mercury. Transiting Pluto lines up conjunct the Sun. 
Transiting Uranus is still sitting on the Ascendant, and now transiting Sun in Taurus is in opposition
to natal Saturn and Ascendant. Her natal Ascendant is strongly and repeated activated in this series of
charts.
86

This last bi-wheel has the SR in the inner ring and the election in the outer.
Here it is worth noting that transiting Mars on Election Day is angular and strong in his rulership in
Aries, tightly conjunct transiting Mercury, opposite the Sun. The repeated strength of both Mars and
Saturn in this entire series of charts is very striking.
87

Putting the icing on the cake, these are the yearly directions of the SR Ascendant around the wheel for
around May 3, the day of the election.
Z (Taurus)Jupiter D --> Asc 196.289199 1979.04.30
Z Opposition Mars D --> Asc 197.345289 1979.05.01
Z (Taurus)Saturn D --> Asc 200.795126 1979.05.04
The election was May 3. 1979. The directed Ascendant is making an opposition to LOY SR
Mars in Scorpio, shortly after opposition to her natal Saturn and Ascendant.  The
directed Ascendant is marked in italics in the seventh house in the diagram below.  Both her natal
Ascendant and SR Mars are activated by the yearly direction.
It follows the rule that hard aspects to the LOY in the yearly directions mark significant events. This
coincides in time with the significant transit of Mars through Aries, the profected sign
of the year.  Mars is doubly emphasized by both direction and transit at election time.
88

Preparing for a Client Reading
In this chapter I want to discuss how I use these predictive techniques to prepare for a client session,
and during the course of the reading itself.
I do not think astrology is primarily about prediction or fortune-telling. I also do not think that
astrology is something that the astrologer does as a solo act, putting on a kind of miracle show while
the client just sits back and watches.
I am convinced that astrology is not well suited for vague "tell me what's going to happen to me"
readings. Astrology is a sacred art, a consultation with the Gods, and we can use this predictive tool
because the ordered and symbolic movement of the heavens mirrors the divine order. When we study
astrology we are contemplating divine order. We are peering into the mind of the Holy.
Astrology works best in response to a heartfelt need for guidance from the Gods. The medieval
astrologer Guido Bonatti lays this out very clearly in the first sections of his 146 Considerations
chapter from his landmark compilation, The Book of Astronomy, and William Lilly echoes that setting
in his Christian Astrology.
Here is what Bonatti has to say. This quote is from the Ben Dykes translation of Bonatti's 146
Considerations.
"...he must observe this manner of asking, plainly that he ought to pray to the Lord God, from Whom
every good beginning leads, and to entreat Him (with all devotion and with a contrite spirit) that it
should fall to him to reach an understanding of the truth of those things about which he intends to
ask. Then with this truth he ought to go to the astrologer with intention concerning that about which
he is going to ask, ...and the intention for which he retains in his heart for a day and a night (or
more), not touched by just any motion of the mind.
...the beginning statement of which, however, is always the name of the Highest; for certain people
sometimes do otherwise, and for that reason they come to be deceived in themselves, and they
sometimes pressure the astrologer - or rather, they often lie; for a stupid querent makes the
responding wise man deviate sometimes; and men, not knowing the folly of him who asks poorly,
sometimes defame and revile the astrologer when the astrologer is not guilty..."(p 265)
Consider the implications of this lovely statement of Bonatti's.
An astrology reading is ultimately seeking guidance from God, the Gods, the Holy, the
Order of the Universe - I don't care what you call it, the Principle and the Reality is the
same. As such, it is a sacred endeavor, and not to be taken lightly.
The quality of the reading depends as much on the client as it does on the astrologer. 
89
Focused intent produces a focused, quality reading. Fuzzy intent produces a fuzzy reading. A hostile
client who walks in with a chip on their shoulder, looking to pick holes in what the astrologer does, is
likely to have their expectations confirmed, and end up with a garbage reading. This is important
enough that both Bonatti and Lilly have a series of Considerations Before Judgment that are designed
to help weed out hostile clients. 
The astrology reading is a sacred transaction, and both astrologer and client must
prepare themselves and step into the sacred space together.
Given a good intent on the part of the client, I have developed my own procedure to maximize the
potential for a quality reading. 
This first step is the most important part of the process.
Step One: Get the Agenda from the Client. This is prior to the reading. For me it happens before
I put a date and time for a reading on my calendar. I ask for feedback on what is on their mind for the
reading, what are their main concerns, their questions - what is the purpose of the reading. The more
focused this is, and the more detailed, the better I can prepare, and the more useful they likely will find
the reading.
The question from the client provides the focus of the reading. That provides the frame within which
the symbols of astrology make the most sense. A good question acts like a lens that helps the astrologer
know where to look, what factors to weigh up.
Given that agenda from the client, this is what I draw up, usually in this order.
1) The natal chart - and I include a detailed study of the dignity and debility of the chart. Everything
else grows out of that.
2) The primary directions of the Big Four, Ascendant, Midheaven, Sun, and Moon. If there is any
clear preponderance of a single planet across those, I will be on the alert for that planet being
prominent in the other systems. Remember the general principle of converging systems. Depending on
what I find in the following steps, I may come back and run directions for any other planets that seem
to be particularly important for the period.
The next two steps I do together for a sequence of two or sometimes three years - previous, current,
and next. I want to get a feel for the year leading up to the reading, and the year following.
3) Profections - I draw up a profected chart in the outer rim of a bi-wheel around the natal chart. I
first note the profected sign and house, and planets activated there. I also look for how the profections
line up with the natal chart, and I am especially looking for planetary overlays, where a profected
planet has moved to sit on a natal planet. This is used in combination with the next chart, which is -
90
4) Solar returns - This is where I spend the most time with analysis for predictive purposes. I treat
each solar return as a stand-alone chart, and I read it keeping in mind the profected sign and LOY, and
planets activated in that sign. I check to see if any of the returns has the markings of a Big Year. In this
analysis, I am comparing the dignity and condition of the planets in the SR with their condition in the
natal chart.
For each solar return I draw up
A) a stand-alone return chart.
B) a bi-wheel with natal in center and SR around.
C) a bi-wheel with SR in center and natal around.
I am looking for how planets in the two charts line up, and the relative house positions.
5) I run the yearly direction of the Ascendant through the current solar return chart, and mark
the periods when it moves through the signs of the same mode as the profection, and direct major
aspects to the profected LOY. Depending on the timing of their birthday relative to the reading, I
sometimes run the yearly directions for more than one year. 
6) I always run a 2 year listing of transit to natal aspects for the planets from Jupiter on out. With
the planets I use only conjunctions, oppositions, squares and trines, and I usually don't place a lot of
weight on trines to trigger action. I give most weight to hard transits to the personal planets, Sun,
Moon, Mercury, Venus and Mars, and to the angles.
I use the directions plus the transits for a given year to help pinpoint the most important periods,
marked by the yearly direction of the SR Ascendant to signs in hard aspect to the sign of the year. I am
particularly scanning for a coincidence of directions and transits. If a period of the year looks
particularly significant, it is worth checking an ephemeris for transits of all of the planets for that
period. The directions help narrow down which parts of the year need that detailed focus.
7) It is worth checking solar and lunar eclipses for the year, to see how they intersect with the
sensitive points in the natal and solar return charts.
(Note that, in addition to these, I add a listing of lifetime secondary progressions, looking just at
progressed lunar phases, and planets changing signs or stationing. I usually look at that list early in
the process, to get a feel for the overall sweep of the person's life, especially where they are in the
lunar phase cycle. Secondary progressions are not usually used with the Cycle of the Year techniques
in the traditional literature, so I have not covered them in this book. )
At this point, after printing out all of these charts and listings, I pause, take a deep breath, say a prayer
asking forgiveness from the gods of trees, and write a check to the Canadian Forestry Preservation
Foundation.
If this sounds like a lot of material, you're right, it is. I maneuver through this mass of material by
focusing only on the big standouts in the process, and I am looking for the places that the various
systems converge. Almost without fail I can see major configurations and themes emerge.
91
The more important the question is to the client, the more likely I am to see those
concerns clearly mirrored in the prominent configurations for the period.
This is where having a topic of focus for the reading is so very valuable. It helps to figure out what to
look at.
Note the following point, which is key to using this material with clients.
After I have gone through this material, I come out of it basically with a list of
questions that I am ready to ask the client during the first part of the reading.
Underline that - I come out of the preliminary analysis with more questions than answers.  The
analysis gives me a preliminary orientation and a list of dates and issues. The purpose of the questions
is to map the significant points from my analysis to their concrete life situation. I include questions
concerning past periods, which lets me get data about what actually happened.
How I phrase the questions will depend on how well-versed the client is with the language of astrology.
The questions are generally something along this line:
I see that, two years ago, there was an important point where Mercury stationed and turned
retrograde. This was likely a time when you had a major change in how you use your mind, and
may have become more withdrawn or introspective, or more drawn to your inner life. Can you tell
me how your life changed around that time?
or
Last year at your birthday the area of home and family was coming up, and this was likely a major
focus in the year. Is that correct? How did that play out?
I start with a series of leading questions like this, focused on a previous period. I try to phrase the
questions in a way that is inviting rather than demanding. I am trying to give them a safe space within
which they can share at the level they feel comfortable.
My purpose of doing these questions for past periods is to get a feel for how the planets act in their
particular life, and to get a feel for where things are headed. This process also typically builds a great
deal of credibility - if a person can say, "Why Yes, here's what happened then and it was like this" ,
then you have shown that these predictive techniques do work.
For the great majority of clients, I find that they are more than eager to talk about what is happening
to them since I have provided an understanding framework within which they are welcome to talk
about what is most important to them. There are precious few areas in most people's lives where we
get permission to talk about what really matters to us, so this is welcomed by most people.
92
The more information the person is willing to share, the better the reading goes, and the more useful
feedback I can offer. Given their sharing I can then take the language of the astrology symbolism and
show how it plays out in the details of their life.
The astrology and my questions provide a shape, a framework, a way of making sense of what they are
going through. The actual reading of the details is done by the client, and as astrologer I am just
helping to tie it together. That framework also helps to determine which upcoming directions or
transits are likely to be important. Within that, I find that it is much more reliable to look at general
periods than at specific dates.
Also, if the client has a question about a specific time frame or event they have planned, that
framework gives me a way of determining how it will turn out.
---
Another very important point - clients often come for help in making a decision. My job is not to make
the decision for them, but to provide them the data and framework they can use to make the decision
for themselves.
That gets tricky, because sometimes clients come in wanting me to tell them what to do. That way, if
things don't turn out the way they want, they have someone to blame. I gently try to turn the question
back on them, present the data, and help them realize they must choose for themselves. Blame is a
useless game to play - ultimately we are each responsible for how we deal with our own life situation.
I have to present the data as I see it mirrored in their chart, rather than give them my own opinion. I
have figured out from experience that astrology knows more than I do. More than once I have seen the
client's question and thought, wow, that won't work - and then looked at the data to see the charts
pointing in a very different direction from what I would have said on my own. That is an ongoing
challenge and art for me, separating out what the chart is saying from my own opinion about what
should be happening.
Very often it feels that the answers to the client's questions emerge from the astrological data. The
work of the reading happens in the interchange between my knowledge of astrological symbolism, and
the client's knowledge of their life situations and their desires. That is where the magic happens.
---
There is one last thing I need to add - I always try to start the actual sessions with a brief period of
quiet and inner alignment, and a prayer for guidance, and then end with another centering and a
prayer of thanksgiving. (The prayers are private and internal, before and after the client meeting.) I am
very serious when I say that astrology is an art involving consulting with the gods, and the more I
practice this art, the more aware I am that there is no way that I could do this without divine guidance.
It really does help to consciously place myself in the divine presence.
93
When the session works well I sometimes have the feeling that I am allowing the gods to speak to the
client through the reading, and my job is to provide a sacred space, a kind of magic circle, within which
that can happen. I have done my homework by studying the details of the symbols of astrology in
general and of this particular group of charts, and I offer that language to be used by the gods.
When you approach astrology, remove your shoes and take a moment to compose your heart; you are
walking on sacred ground.
Introibo ad altare Dei...
94
Tying it All Together - Examples
The purpose of this part of the book is to give some examples worked out in more detail, to show how
the system as a whole can work. All of these examples are of significant years, which means you will
see strong correlations between the different predictive techniques.  For less eventful years you will
often find that the correlations are less frequent and exact, or that you have contradictory indications.
For all of these examples I include all the necessary charts and listings to be able to follow the analysis.
The descriptions are designed for you to pick out the aspects and correlations in the charts as you read,
to understand how the analysis is done.
The first example takes Marilyn Monroe and looks at the year of her death. There are some striking
points regarding primary directions of planets that are involved in the natal chart configuration that
was likely the weak point where her death played out.
The next long example is that of the mass shooting in Las Vegas, Nevada in October 2017. We have a
tightly timed chart for the shooter, and a time for the event accurate to within a few minutes. The
number of correlations across all of the predictive systems is mind-boggling.
The next section takes two significant years from the life of Napoleon Bonaparte, when reflecting his
rise, and the other reflecting his fall. It shows how different parts of his natal chart are activated on the
way up as opposed to the planets active on the way down.
The next example is from a peak year in my own life, showing an unusually strong emphasis on a
single planet in directions, that is then echoed in the other charts.
The final example looks at a very interesting and multi-dimensional solar return from a pivotal year in
the life of the writer Maya Angelou.
95
Marilyn Monroe
The life of the famed, legendary, very nearly deified film star and media goddess, Marilyn Monroe, is a
messy and disturbing story of professional fame and personal tragedy. In this example I want to focus
on a particular group of planets that were likely involved in her early death in 1962, and how her death
is reflected in the directions of those planets at the time of her death.
The tightest aspect configuration in this chart is the nasty applying t-square between Neptune at 22
Leo in the first house, opposite the Moon at 19 Aquarius in the 7th house of marriage, both planets
tightly square to a retrograde Saturn in Scorpio in the 4th house. Since this is a day chart, the most
dangerous planet is Mars, in the 8th house of death in Pisces, having dignity by triplicity and by
bound. Mars in turn is in a tight applying trine to Saturn in the 4th house, and Mars rules that Saturn.
Mars controls Saturn and the two work together with that trine, to the detriment of the Moon - think
abusive relationships here.
The likely cause of death was suicide from drug overdose (Neptune) from serious depression (Saturn
square Moon).
96

It occurred to me that, at the time of her death, it would be logical to look at the directions for the
Moon (which represents the physical body and her emotional state) and the two malefics, Saturn and
Mars. This is what I found.
Z Sextile Moon D --> Saturn 28.549927 1954.12.19
Z Sextile Moon D --> Mars 29.792243 1956.03.17
Z Square Mars D --> Saturn 30.304514 1956.09.20
Z (Sagittarius)Saturn D --> Saturn 30.593424 1957.01.03
Z (Aries)Mars D --> Mars 30.747974 1957.03.01
Z (Pisces)Mercury D --> Moon 31.728474 1958.02.22
Z (Pisces)Mars D --> Moon 35.225602 1961.08.22
Z (Sagittarius)Mars D --> Saturn 35.999166 1962.06.01
Z (Aries)Saturn D --> Mars 36.068099 1962.06.26
The Moon - her body, her health, and her emotions - is in the bounds of Mars - and in this case the
exact location of the direction is significant - it is directed to the bounds of Mars in Pisces,
which is in the 8th house of death and is almost exactly conjunct with natal Mars itself
- and remember, natal Mars rules natal Saturn, which is in square to both the Moon and Neptune. The
participating planet is Mercury, but it is within a degree or two of natal Mars in his own bounds, so we
can justifiably take Mars to effectively be participator here also. If you consider the symbolism of
bound as meaning a delimited or confined space, then the Moon is directed right into the room that
Mars rules and is currently occupying.
Saturn is in the bounds of Mars with Mars as most recently active participator - and Saturn is already
ruled by Mars in the natal - so this is an example of fulfilling the promise of the natal chart.
In addition, Mars is in the bounds of Saturn, with Saturn as participator. Directed Mars is in Aries, so
it is practically conjunct her natal Venus.
Saturn is in Mars/Mars, and Mars is in Saturn/Saturn. Each of the two malefics is in the bounds and
partner of the other malefic.
Since Neptune is involved with the tight aspect to Saturn and the Moon, I tried running the directions
for Neptune - and this is what I found.
Z (Virgo)Mars D --> Neptune 33.490009 1959.11.27
Z Sextil Saturn D --> Neptune 33.998436 1960.05.31
Neptune is in the Bounds of Mars with Saturn participator. Again, the two malefics are involved. The
cause of death was drug overdose. 
Monroe's death was very early morning August 5, 1962 - she was found to be unresponsive at 3 am that
day.
Here is the solar return for the year of her death.
97
The solar return has Aries rising. The solar return Ascendant at 25 Aries is pretty closely conjunct her
natal Venus at 28 Aries. This is practically conjunct directed Mars, and is in the bounds of
Saturn.
The ruler of the solar return Ascendant is Mars , who is the rising planet, but from early
Taurus - so in his detriment. Note that Saturn and Neptune are in a very tight applying
square, which duplicates the tight square between those planets in the natal chart, and the square is
in fixed signs both here and in the natal - Saturn in the same sign as natal Moon, Neptune in the same
sign as natal Saturn. Mars in this chart, in the fixed sign Taurus, is applying to opposition to Neptune
and square to Saturn. So, we have Mars, Saturn and Neptune featured in the solar return as they are in
the natal - fulfilling the natal promise.
The solar return Moon is exalted in late Taurus, the same sign as Mars here, and is in very late
balsamic phase, approaching New Moon, the end of a cycle. Solar return Moon is in the bounds
of Saturn.
As a curious side note concerning this chart, it struck me that there are a very large number of planets
that are at eleven degrees of a sign - Jupiter in the 12th, Saturn in the 11th, Neptune in the 8th, the
nodal axis in Leo/Aquarius, and Venus in Cancer in the 4th - and the Sun is very close, at 10 degrees
Gemini, here and in the natal. That is five planets plus the nodal axis.
----
98

This is a chart for the approximate time of death - we don't know the exact time, but it was likely
between late evening August 4, and 3 am. I ran this chart for 1 am, a couple of hours before she was
found unresponsive.
This next is only conjecture, but if I had to guess a time of death I would put it at around 2 am, since
that was very close to the time when the Ascendant would have been conjunct Mars at 18 Gemini. The
Ascendant would have been in Gemini from roughly 1 am to 3 am,  so there is at least a reasonable
chance that Mars was the rising planet at the time of her death.
Transiting Mars at time of death is 18 Gemini, square natal Mars at 20 Pisces. Transiting Sun at 12 Leo
is very near her natal Ascendant at 13 Leo, and transiting Mercury at 19 Leo is quite near her natal
Neptune at 22 Leo - recall that, at the time of death, the Moon was in the bounds of Mars with Mercury
as the partner, and here we have Mercury near her natal Neptune in her first house.
99

The Las Vegas Shooting, October 1, 2017
One of the main rules of astrological timing is that any major event should show multiple significant
correlations pointing at the event. The more major the event, the more correlations there should be.
Another main rule is that the angles - the Ascendant and Descendant, Midheaven and IC - are the
places of action, so that event timing should show significant planetary triggers at angles. 
These correlations should not be subtle. They should be significant, redundant, and tight. In your face.
Accurately timed charts are helpful to have since the angles shift quickly as time passes.
With the mass shooting that took place in Las Vegas on October 1, 2017 we have a very exact time for
the event. News sources say that the call to the police dispatcher was at 10:08 pm, so the shooting
must have started a few minutes before that. I am using 10:05 pm.
We also have a reliable timed birth chart for the shooter, Stephen Paddock. The astro.com site gives
his birth time as April 9, 1953, at 11:05 am in Clinton, Iowa, and cites reference to a birth certificate,
which is considered the highest level of reliability.
We have an accurate time for the event, and an accurate birth time for the shooter. When I started
researching this event I expected to see some significant hits, but I was not prepared for the flood of
correlations at all levels that I kept finding. The sheer number and tightness of them made the hair of
my neck stand up.
I want to use this example to show how the predictive techniques -direction through the bounds,
profections, solar return and transit - all fit together in with the sort of eerie, everything converging at
once kind of synchronicity that shows up only very, very rarely, in freaky major events like the
shooting. 
This is the natal chart of the shooter, Stephen Paddock.
100
I will focus on the parts of the chart that relate to the timing of the shooting.
There are two very nasty oppositions in this chart, and oppositions are aspects that are tense and
potentially explosive.
The natal Sun is in Aries, loosely conjunct Venus, and those two planets are in opposition to Saturn
and Neptune in Libra. These planets are in the strong and angular tenth and fourth houses, so they are
prominent, visible and active. The Sun to Saturn opposition is particularly nasty since the reception
between them is very bad, with the Sun is in the sign of Saturn's fall, and Saturn is in the sign of the
Sun's fall. You could describe this as saying the two planets despise each other. Oppositions are
difficult, and the bad reception makes it a lot worse. This opposition is in a tight square to the
Ascendant, which makes it stronger yet.
The other opposition is between the natal Moon, which is Aquarius in the eighth house, and Pluto in
Leo in the second house. Eighth house planets typically are difficult to express or control. The Moon is
particularly important since it rules Cancer, which is the Ascendant in this chart. Also, the Moon in
Aquarius is ruled by Saturn, and Pluto in Leo is ruled by the Sun, which are the two planets in the
other opposition.
101

Jupiter is in tight square to the Moon/Pluto opposition, and Mars is in an applying square. Mars here
is in his detriment in Taurus, so he is off balance, edgy, irritable.
Keep those two oppositions and the squares in mind. 
----
Before we start looking at the charts specific to the year of the shooting, I want to list the most
important directions for the planets we are watching that were in affect at the time of the shooting.
Z (Gemini)Saturn D --> Sun 63.092568 2016.05.12
Z Trine Saturn D --> Sun 63.433971 2016.09.14
The Sun is in the Bounds of Saturn with Saturn participator  - reportedly Paddock had been
despondent and depressed for a period prior to the shooting. Recall that Saturn and Sun are in
opposition in the natal, in each other's fall, so they basically detest each other.
Z Sun D --> Moon 63.490470 2016.10.05
Z (Aries)Mars D --> Moon 63.999264 2017.04.08
The Moon is in the bounds of Mars  starting mid 2017, with the Sun as participator. The Moon is
in bad shape square to Mars in bad shape in the natal, and this direction activates that. Moon plus
Mars is an unpleasant combination at best, and here they are in a tough aspect in bad shape.
Z Trine Venus D --> Saturn 59.720472 2012.12.28
Z (Sagittarius)Mars D --> Saturn 60.409081 2013.09.05/
Saturn is in the bounds of Mars, with Saturn participator. One malefic being in the bounds of the
other malefic is bad news. 
Z (Cancer)Mercury D --> Mars 59.260622 2012.07.13
Z Sextile Mars D --> Mars 61.245482 2014.07.08
Mars is in the bounds of Mercury, with Mars participator.
Z Jupiter D --> Mercury 59.762729 2013.01.12
Z (Taurus)Mars D --> Mercury 63.741503 2017.01.04
Mercury is in the bounds of Mars, with Jupiter participator. I find it worth noting that Mars and
Mercury are in each other's bounds.
Z (Cancer)Jupiter D --> Jupiter 58.067500 2011.05.04
Z Square Saturn D --> Jupiter 64.125315 2017.05.24
Jupiter is in his own bounds, square Saturn participator.
102
We will return again to these directions, and note their exact locations, at the end of this study.
---
This is the chart of Paddock's solar return for this year, 2017.
First, note that the Ascendant axis of the chart is Sagittarius and Gemini - this means that those two
signs are particularly activated this year. That will end up being very important later. 
Saturn is rising in this chart, which activates the potential of the natal Saturn, including the
opposition.
The ruler of the solar return Ascendant is Jupiter - and Jupiter in the solar return is in tight
opposition to the Sun in Aries, which activates the Sun/ Saturn opposition in the natal .
Jupiter, ruler of the Ascendant in the solar return, is sitting right on top of Saturn and Neptune in the
natal chart. Saturn is doubly activated now.
In this solar return Uranus is in Aries conjunct the Sun, sitting right on top of the Saturn - Neptune
conjunction in the natal. That is strong, and explosive. Recall that Uranus is conjunct the Ascendant in
the natal chart. Saturn is now triply activated.
103

Finally, Mars is now at 21 Taurus -  so Mars, by degree, has perfected the applying square
aspect to Pluto and the Moon in the natal chart.  The Moon to Mars connection is also
activated by Moon being in the bounds of Mars, which we noted earlier. This is a very good example of
fulfilling the promise of the natal chart.
-----
Next I want to look at the profected chart for Paddock for this year. 
First, note that the Sun/Saturn opposition has moved to Aquarius/Leo - so it is sitting
right on top of the Moon/Pluto opposition in the natal chart. The two oppositions are
coinciding here.
Also note that the profected Moon/Pluto opposition has moved to Gemini/Sagittarius -
which are the signs along the Ascendant/Descendant axis in the solar return chart . The
Moon in Gemini is considered to be debilitated since it is in the 12th sign from its home sign of Cancer,
and it falls in the twelfth house in Paddock's natal chart, and the twelfth house is related to self-
undoing. Again we see the two oppositions in the natal chart coinciding.
Note that the profected Moon is at 22 Gemini. We will see that degree again in a moment.
---------------------
104

This next chart is of the time of the shooting, October 1 at 10:05 pm.
Note that the Ascendant of the chart is 21 Gemini - again the Gemini/Sagittarius axis
which we saw in the solar return chart. 
Most ominously, note the position of Saturn - at 22 Sagittarius, it is sitting right on the
Ascendant/Descendant axis at the moment of the shooting. Again Saturn is activated.
Note that Mars is at 17 Virgo, in applying square to that Ascendant/Saturn axis . Mars
activates Saturn.
Jupiter at 28 Libra is in tight opposition to Uranus in Aries, and the two planets sit on
the axis of the Venus/Saturn opposition in the natal. Saturn is activated yet again.
-------------
This next chart is a bi-wheel, which has the chart of the shooting in the center, and the profected chart
of the year in the outer ring.
105

Note that the Moon/Pluto opposition in the profected chart sits right on top of the
Ascendant/Descendant axis at the time of the shooting.
Also note that the Moon at the time of the shooting is at 25 Aquarius - on the profected Sun/Saturn
opposition, which coincides with the natal Moon/Pluto opposition. The oppositions and the angles are
activating each other.
Profected Mars and Jupiter are sitting on top of Venus and Mars in Virgo, and all are
square to the Ascendant/Descendant axis.
The natal chart, the profected chart, the solar return chart, and the chart of the shooting interact here
like five mirrors all reflecting back on each other.
106

And now we add the directions.
I want to close our study by reviewing the directions in effect at time of the shooting, and look at where
they interact with the other charts. The sheer number of tight aspects they make speak for themselves,
and are quite overwhelming.
Z (Gemini)Saturn D --> Sun 63.092568 2016.05.12
Z Trine Saturn D --> Sun 63.433971 2016.09.14
The directed Sun is at 24 Gemini, conjunct the Ascendant at the time of the shooting,
opposite transiting Saturn, recreating the natal Sun/Saturn opposition while being in
the bounds of Saturn.
Z Sun D --> Moon 63.490470 2016.10.05
Z (Aries)Mars D --> Moon 63.999264 2017.04.08
The directed Moon is at 20 Aries, conjunct the natal Sun and opposite natal Saturn
and  Neptune  -  again  activating  the  Sun/Saturn  opposition,  again  linking  the
Sun/Saturn and Moon/Pluto oppositions, while in the bounds of Mars which squares
the Moon/Pluto opposition.
Z Trine Venus D --> Saturn 59.720472 2012.12.28
Z (Sagittarius)Mars D --> Saturn 60.409081 2013.09.05/
Directed Saturn is at 25 Sagittarius, conjunct the Descendant and transiting Saturn at
the time of the shooting, in the bounds of Mars.
Z (Cancer)Mercury D --> Mars 59.260622 2012.07.13
Z Sextile Mars D --> Mars 61.245482 2014.07.08
Directed Mars is at roughly 17 Cancer, conjunct natal Uranus and near the natal
Ascendant, squaring natal Sun and Saturn.
Z (Cancer)Jupiter D --> Jupiter 58.067500 2011.05.04
Z Square Saturn D --> Jupiter 64.125315 2017.05.24
Jupiter is at roughly 24 Cancer,  square natal Saturn and Venus, conjunct the Natal
Ascendant, squaring natal Sun and Saturn.
Finally, here are the annual directions of the solar return Ascendant right around the time of the
October 1 shooting.
107
Z Opposition Saturn D --> Asc 2017.09.08
Z (Cancer)Mars D --> Asc 2017.09.11
Z Sextile Mercury D --> Asc 2017.09.16
Z (Cancer)Venus D --> Asc 2017.09.19
Z (Cancer)Mercury D --> Asc  2017.09.26
Z Square Jupiter D --> Asc 2017.10.02
Z (Cancer)Jupiter D --> Asc 2017.10.03
The directed Ascendant has moved to Cancer, his natal Ascendant,  squaring  the  Jupiter
opposition  to  Sun  and  Uranus  in  the  solar  return.  This  is  very  near  his  natal
Ascendant and square the Sun/Venus opposition to Neptune and Saturn  that we have
noted repeatedly in this analysis.
---
The only aspects I have noted in this entire study are the major conjunctions, oppositions, and
squares.
Remember that the necessary conditions for a major event have to do with fulfilling the promise of the
natal chart, and activating major points in that chart and in the event, especially at angles. I find the
sheer number of tight, significant and redundant correlations and hard aspects in this particular
cluster of charts to be overwhelming. This is the most extreme set of correlations I have ever seen.
This is a very good example of how a major event can show tight correlations between all of the parts
of the cycle of the year - the natal chart, the directions, the profection, the solar return, and finally the
event itself. All the charts and directions converge in this case. Too well.
This example also points out how it can be well worth checking the directions of significant planets
that are activated by the solar return and profections for a year, their bounds and participators, and
also their degree position.
We have thoroughly demonstrated one of the main themes of this book, that the bounds are important
for the consistently effective use of primary directions, and primary directions are very effective when
used in conjunction with the cycle of the year techniques of profections and solar returns. 
108
Napoleon Bonaparte
I want to look at two important years from the life of the legendary political leader Napoleon. We will
look at a big year on the way up, when he is appointed Consul for life, and a pivotal year on the way
down, the year of the catastrophic invasion of Russia.
Napoleone di Buonaparte, 15 August 1769, 11:30 AM, Ajaccio, France. Rodden Rating A.
The big planets on the angles set the tone - Sun and Jupiter. Jupiter is on the Ascendant ruled by Mars
in a tight applying sextile aspect. Mars, in Virgo, is conjunct Neptune - this suggests illusion, theater,
glamour, and also a lack of a sense of limits. In traditional astrology the ruler of the Ascendant
represents the person, so Mars is Napoleon himself - Mars conjunct Neptune suggesting a grandiose
self-conception. Mars is ruled by Mercury which is prominent in Leo near the Midheaven. Mercury in
turn is ruled by the Sun, shining gloriously in Leo near the Midheaven in the tenth house.  This whole
group of planets suggests that power, glory and reputation are prime motivating values, and Mercury
and Neptune in the mix suggests that much of that is done by communication, by persuasion, and by
illusion.
The planet in the worst shape is Saturn, in detriment Cancer in the ninth house - remember the
association of Saturn in the ninth house with distant lands when we look at the Russian invasion.  The
tight opposition between Saturn and the Moon is interesting - each planet is in its own detriment, but
109

the two are in mutual reception with each other. Planets in detriment have a restless, unsettled and
unbalanced quality. 
From what we have seen we should expect that Jupiter and the Sun, along with Mars, should be strong
when Napoleon has strong years - and conversely Saturn should be strong in negative years. 
---
Here are the directions for the year 1802, when Napoleon was appointed First Consul of France for 
life.
Asc - Jupiter(Sag)/Moon
MC - Jupiter(Virgo)/Jupiter
Sun - Mars(Virgo)/Saturn
Moon - Venus(Pisces)/Venus
Both the Ascendant and Midheaven are in Jupiter bounds, and the Midheaven has Jupiter as 
participator also. The prominent Sun is in the bounds of aggressive, expansive Mars.
Note that both the Sun and the Midheaven have directed into Virgo, the sign where we find natal Mars
and Neptune. I am finding that planets directing into a sign where natal planets reside increases the
communication and influence of those planets with each other. We will see that again in a later
example.
Finally, note that the Moon is now in the bounds of Venus with Venus participator. The directed Moon
is in Pisces, opposite the natal Neptune in Virgo and soon applying to an opposition with natal Mars.
We mentioned the emptiness and restlessness of that Moon in detriment, and here it is aligning with
the Mars/Neptune urge for power and recognition.
110
This is the profected chart for 1802 in a bi-wheel with the natal.
The profected sign is Leo, in the tenth house, and profected Jupiter is dead on his Midheaven - so as
we expected, Sun and Jupiter are activated. Also note that the axes activated in the profection are the
fixed signs, which is the same as the axes in the natal.
The profected Ascendant up at the top of the chart on the MC speaks of Napoleon being exalted.
This next chart is the solar return for same year.
111

The solar return has the same Ascendant and Midheaven signs as in the natal, each within a 6 degree
orb, which is a very strong marker an for important year. That is accentuated by the axes in the
profected chart also lining up in fixed signs.  LOY Sun is still the Midheaven, and SR Mercury dead on
the MC as in the natal.
There are some ominous configurations here - Jupiter is in detriment in Virgo, in a pretty tight
separating conjunction from Saturn. Those two planets are sitting on the South Node, which is further
challenging and diminishing, and both are square to Mars in Gemini in the eighth, and loosely
opposite Pluto on the North Node in Pisces. Yes, this is a year of glory, but there are signs of trouble.
112

Next is a bi-wheel of the natal and SR, clearly showing the closeness of the angles in the two charts.
Note that the Jupiter/Saturn conjunction we noted in the SR is sitting on top of the Mars/Neptune
conjunction in the natal, and SR Neptune is rising in the natal first house, sitting conjunct SR Jupiter.
That makes two prominent Neptune hits, on Jupiter and Mars, planets associated with his Ascendant,
hence his self-image and self-worth. The myth of Napoleon is taking shape here - and from what I have
read, this was a deliberately cultivated image. In modern terms we would say that Napoleon knew how
to play the media of his day to create the kind of image he wanted to project - the glorious,
undefeatable Emperor.
As we expected, Jupiter, Mars and Sun are all prominent this year - but not always in helpful ways.
There is a lot of illusion, a lot of glamour. The Neptune influence is unsettling and deceptive. Mercury
is within a degree of its natal position and more tightly conjunct the SR Midheaven - so again, much of
the theme of this year is related to communication, persuasion, perception.
113

The invasion of Russia was the turning point of overreach that led to his downfall.  The Russian
invasion began on June 24, 1812, so I am using Napoleon's August 1811 charts.
The profection has moved to a 7th house year, a year of open enemies, and the  LOY is Venus, ruler of
Taurus. Venus is cadent in both the profection and natal charts.
Once again the natal and profected angles line up in fixed signs, but in this chart the profected
Ascendant has moved to the seventh house of open enemies and conflict, and the profected Midheaven
has moved down into the bottom of the chart, in the fourth house.
You also have that curiosity of profected charts, that in a seventh house year all planets are opposite
their natal position. All planets in rulership in the natal are in detriment here, and vice-versa. In this
chart that is particularly visible with the Moon Saturn opposition swapping places, so we now have
profected Saturn in rulership on top of Moon in detriment, and profected Moon in rulership on top of
Saturn in detriment. To my mind that suggests a kind of emotional restlessness and craving for power
and exceeding limits, that plays in with the urges for power and glory we see prominently featured in
the chart as a whole.
114

Here are the directions in place for the year of the invasion of Russia.
Asc - Jupiter(Sag)/Mercury
MC - Saturn(Virgo)/Saturn
Sun - Mercury(Libra)/Mercury
Moon - Jupiter(Pisces)/Mars
The big switch in directions is the Midheaven, which has  
moved into Saturn/Saturn bounds. When Napoleon was 
appointed Consul for Life in the previous configuration we looked 
at, the MC was in Jupiter/Jupiter directions. We will see Saturn 
prominently activated in both profected and SR charts.
The Saturn bounds of Virgo are very late in the sign, so Saturn is coming near leaving the sign and 
directing into Libra, the sign of his exaltation, and the natal twelfth house of self-undoing. The 
Midheaven directed into the 12th house in 1813, after the collapse of the Russian invasion and shortly 
before Prussia invaded France. Paris fell and Napoleon abdicated in 1814.
It is also worth noting that the Sun has just recently directed into Libra, the sign of its fall, and the 
natal 12th house. The Sun has Mercury for both bound lord and participator.
The directed Ascendant is now in mid Sagittarius, in Jupiter bounds with Mercury as participator.
The directed Moon is in Pisces and has moved into the bounds of expansive Jupiter, and has perfected 
the opposition to natal Mars.
We will note the positions of these directed points as they interact with the solar return chart for this 
year. That is next.
115
This is the solar return for 1811.
Note the solar return Saturn dead on the Ascendant. There is a Mars/Neptune conjunction in
the natal chart, and this SR repeats that Mars/Neptune conjunction again, this time in the first house,
above the Ascendant.  Those two planets are in an applying trine with LOY Venus which is in the SR
ninth, associated with distant lands. 
In whole sign houses it often happens that planets in the first house above the Ascendant are visible to
people observing the person, but are out of the person's awareness, having a kind of twelfth house
quality.  Here this shows Napoleon's expansive megalomania invading Russia, visible to everyone but
himself.
Looking further at Mars, as it moves it is applying first to Neptune, then to Saturn. First to limitless
dreams, then to harsh limitation.
Jupiter, the ruler of the solar return Ascendant, is in detriment in the seventh, in opposition to the
difficult first house. Our glorious Sun is now in the ninth house of distant lands.
Looking at the directed planets, the directed Ascendant is sitting in the SR first house near the
Mars/Neptune conjunction. The directed Moon is in Pisces in Jupiter bounds, very near SR Pluto in
the fourth house, and conjunct the SR South Node. The directed Sun is applying to conjunction to the
SR Midheaven.
116

This next chart shows the natal and solar return in a bi-wheel.
The solar return Moon is triggering natal Saturn, which repeats the Moon/Saturn configuration in the
profected chart. In the solar return in the mutable signs there is a T with Mercury, Pluto and Saturn,
and Mercury at the point of the T is sitting on top of the natal Mars/Neptune conjunction. Again we
see that connection of Mercury with Mars and Neptune. This next is conjecture, but I wonder how
much of this Russian invasion was a PR stunt on Napoleon's chart, where he dreamed of presenting
such an invincible image that he would encounter little opposition from his awed opponents.
SR Saturn is sitting on the natal North Node which magnifies it. Disruptive SR Uranus is rising, sitting
conjunct natal Jupiter. The SR Uranus is also sitting opposite natal Uranus which is in the seventh
house. This is an unstable and stressed pair of charts, and Saturn is strongly configured across the two
charts.
117

This wheel flips the two charts and puts the solar return in the center.
Here the natal North Node sitting on SR Saturn and Ascendant is highlighted. Also, in this view of the
chart, the natal Ascendant is sitting in the SR twelfth house of self-undoing. Saturn's position and
condition, in natal, directions, profection and solar return, are an important key to making sense of
this particular group of charts. We have some of the same megalomaniac expansiveness we see in the
natal and in the Consul series of charts - but here Saturn is activated, and the limitations and
consequences of the overreach are striking home.
The Russian invasion began June 24, 1812. These are the directions of the SR Ascendant.
Z (Scorpio)Venus D --> Asc 304.460811 1812.06.20
Z Square Venus D --> Asc 305.344837 1812.06.21.
The SR Ascendant is directed to his natal Ascendant sign Scorpio - in the bounds of Venus and 
square SR Venus, trine natal Venus - and Venus is Lord of the Year in the profected 
chart. The invasion happened shortly after the directed SR Ascendant crossed his 
natal Ascendant. As in the traditional rules, the significant event is marked by tight aspects by the 
directed Ascendant to the Lord of the Year. In this case they are aspects to both natal and SR positions,
and are in the bounds of the LOY.
118

The Gods Smile on Me - Charles Obert
1985 was one of the most important years of my life. This is the year I began the love affair with the
woman who was to become my second wife. We stayed together for 24 years, until her death in
November 2009. (That year was covered in a previous example.)
I call this my Venus year - it will be obvious why when you look at the directions for the year. I am
listing the directions for both angles, the Lot of Fortune, and the main planets, since the pattern is so
very striking and unusual.
Asc - Venus(Pisces)/Venus
MC - Venus(Sag)/Saturn
Sun - Venus(Taurus)/Moon
Moon - Venus(Virgo)/Venus
LOF - Venus(Libra)/ Venus
Venus - Venus(Aries)/Mercury
Mars - Mercury(Sag)/Venus
Jupiter - Saturn(Taurus)/Venus
Saturn- Jupiter(Scorpio)/Venus
Mercury - Mercury(Taurus)/Moon
Every directed point except for Mercury has Venus influence!
6 of the points are in Venus bounds, including the "Big Five" traditional points - Ascendant, 
Midheaven, Sun, Moon, and Lot of Fortune. The Ascendant, Moon and Lot of Fortune also have Venus
as participator.
119
This shows the profected chart of the year outside my natal.
The profected sign of the year is Libra, and the Lord of the Year is Venus. 
Note that profected Venus is sitting in Scorpio, conjunct natal Mars. We will see that Venus/Mars 
connection again in following charts. There is another Mars/Venus activation with profected Mars 
opposite natal Venus.
Saturn and Neptune are both in Libra, so they are activated by the profection. In my natal chart Saturn
and Libra are in a close trine relationship and are in mutual reception, so the two planets work well 
together. Note that profected Saturn is in the seventh house of primary relationship. Given the 
condition of Saturn exalted in my natal chart this speaks to the longevity of the relationship.
I mentioned that the relationship lasted until Cindy's death 24 years later, so you see the same 
profected chart that year. The conditions in the solar return were significantly different, as you will see.
120

This next chart is the solar return for the year.
Ascendant 20 Capricorn is within a few degrees of my natal Ascendant, which is a strong marker for a 
big year. LOY Venus is in detriment in Aries in 4th house (we moved in together), but is applying to 
conjunction to a very strong Mars in rulership - so they do what Mars and Venus do together in the 
privacy of the fourth house. This repeats the pair of Mars/Venus connections in the profection.
Another noteworthy aspect is the Sun/Moon opposition, Virgo to Pisces. Sun/Moon connections are 
often featured in relationships like this. The most common planetary connections to look for in 
synastry for relationships are Sun to Moon, and Venus to Mars, and this chart has both.
121

The next chart shows my natal chart in the inner ring with the solar return in the outer.
Here the closeness of the two Ascendants by degree is very obvious. With the same Ascendants the 
house placements are all the same.
Also note that SR Venus is tightly opposite natal Neptune... I suppose you could say there was more 
than a little Neptunian glamor and romance in this start of our affair - we were indeed star-struck with
each other, and Neptune added the rosy glow and the special effects - the whole affair was larger than 
life, and it felt like living in a Hollywood movie.
122

Cindy and I began our affair in the spring, shortly after my birthday, and we moved in together later in 
the year, in November. The yearly directions of the SR Ascendant around the chart in that period are 
listed here.
(Libra)Saturn D --> Asc 227.017125 1985.10.23
Opp Mercury D --> Asc 227.830358 1985.10.24
(Libra)Mercury D --> Asc 234.577874 1985.10.31
Trine Jupiter D --> Asc 1985.10.31
(Libra)Jupiter D --> Asc 1985.11.10
(Libra)Venus D --> Asc 253.539551 1985.11.19
The solar return Ascendant directed to Libra, the profected sign of year, in late October, while we were 
preparing to move. It is in Jupiter/Jupiter bounds, and Jupiter is in my natal fourth house - very 
fitting for our moving in together. We celebrated Thanksgiving with the directed Ascendant in the 
bounds of Venus in her own sign. 
We noted that the profection activated my natal Saturn in Libra. We married three years later in 1988, 
when the profected sign of the year was Capricorn, ruled by Saturn. An action begun in the profected 
sign where Saturn resides was completed in a sign Saturn rules.
Recall that this is a profected Libra year, as was 2009, the year Cindy died. Saturn and Venus were 
prominent and important in both of those years, but in profoundly different ways.
123
Maya Angelou
The first part of this chapter, on Maya Angelou's natal chart, appears in an expanded form in my book,
Using Dignities in Astrology. I will focus on the parts of the natal chart that apply to an analysis of the
solar return chart, profection and directions for her pivotal year 1968. 
Maya Angelou is poet, writer, and civil rights activist, and is best known for the first in her extended
series of autobiographies, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings. 
Marguerite Ann Johnson, April 4, 1928, 2:10 PM, St Louis, Missouri. Rodden Rating AA.
The rulers of the Ascendant and Midheaven, Sun and Venus, are both exalted. That is itself a signature
for fame. Also, with this very strong Sun exalted, she is as famous as a person as she is for what she
wrote or did.
By sign, the Sun is trine the Ascendant, and Venus is sextile the Midheaven. The angular rulers are
strong both by dignity and by smooth aspect to the angles.
124

Sun and Jupiter Together
The center of the chart is the Sun/Jupiter conjunction in the ninth house. It is in Aries, the Sun's
exaltation. The ninth house relates to writing, teaching and world travel, and her life abundantly
includes all of those. She described herself as a teacher who writes.
Jupiter is approaching conjunction with the Sun. The Sun is exalted in Aries, and Jupiter and the Sun
share a minor dignity called triplicity, so the two planets are strong and work well together. With both
planets strong, Jupiter combust here can mean that the inner effect of Jupiter is intensified. We see
the effects of Jupiter through her solar identity.
The Jupiter/Sun conjunction gave her an unshakable optimism and sense of self-worth, and she was a
proponent of the positive thinking and mental healing movement. This conjunction resonates with a
positive philosophy that gives power to the mind and to words to influence reality. It also gives her a
very strong dedication to her moral ideals, as we saw in the chart of Harry Belafonte. Much of
Angelou's work aligns with and supports the civil rights movement, for racial minorities and for
women.
Venus and Mercury Together
For Angelou's writing and art, we need to consider the Venus/Mercury conjunction in the eighth
house, a house which is considered negative and is related to suffering, to fear and to powerlessness.
Mercury is in detriment and fall, while Venus in exaltation and triplicity, so Venus very clearly
predominates here. Her Mercury writing comes completely out of the Venus artistic perception. This is
not the objectivity of a scientist, it is deeply emotional and artistic.
Mercury is square Saturn, and Mercury receives Saturn in the minor dignity of bounds, which is
related to how she implements her ideas. This shows her life strategy of processing her past, and any
suffering she experiences, in terms of her writing. The art of writing is the method she uses to cope
with and to create her life. Saturn plus Mercury is also good for discipline, form and hard work in
writing.
Mars
Mars is the most difficult planet in Angelou's chart and it is also the most angular planet, being within
3 degrees of the Descendant. Through house rulership Mars is linked to eighth, ninth, third and fourth
houses, so we have connections between the suffering caused by Mars and her family and relatives,
and how dealing with those affected her philosophy.
 Mars is strong by accidental dignity, being angular, direct and fast, but it is peregrine and out of sect,
and it is dominated in its dignities by the other malefic, Saturn, which rules over it. 
125
At age 7 on a visit to her mother, Angelou was raped by her mother's boyfriend. She talked about the
rape and who did it with her relatives, and a few days later the rapist was killed, probably by one of her
uncles. Later in life she related that she stopped speaking because she was convinced her speaking had
killed the man who raped her. The entire experience was so traumatic that she was silent for around
five years.
Looking at her long period of silence after the rape, note that Mercury is in detriment and fall, in the
eighth house of silent suffering. Note also that fall means not being listened to, which could equally
well mean, not speaking. That period of verbal silence likely contributed to her particular artistic
perception and sensitivity.
We noted that she was convinced that her speaking had killed the man who raped her. This ties in with
her lifetime belief in the power of words to directly shape the world. She had a very strong reverence
for the power of words, and this experience of the trauma of rape and death is a core experience in
giving her that conviction.
Mars in the seventh house is also linked to the instability of her marriage and other relationships with
men. Her one child was born from a high school affair, and her early marriage to a Greek sailor fell
apart after around three years.
Saturn
The other malefic, Saturn, is in the fifth house in Sagittarius. It has dignity by triplicity but it is also
retrograde. Saturn rules the sixth house of illness along with ruling the seventh.
We have noted that she had no good long term marriage relationships. The Lord of the seventh house
is in the fifth house. She bore a child while in high school that she raised on her own, and at times this
was a great burden for her. Saturn in the fifth house ruling the sixth house is related to her caring for
her son's health problems, including nursing him for an extended period after a serious accident.
Along with Mars, We can also link this Saturn in the fifth house ruling the seventh house to the rape
experience in her childhood.
On the positive side, this Saturn makes a trine with the Sun/Jupiter conjunction in the 9th house, and
both Sun and Jupiter receive Saturn. She was able to take all of her difficulties and misfortune and
work with them.
Saturn also provides an important connection between Jupiter and Sun in the ninth house, and Venus
and Mercury in the eighth. Jupiter rules Venus and Mercury in Pisces, but there is no direct
connection between them since there is no aspect between them. Jupiter is trine Saturn and rules
Saturn, and Saturn is square to Venus and Mercury, so the hard creative work of Saturn provides a link
between the idealism and moral force of Sun and Jupiter with the artistic sensitivity and creativity of
Mercury and Venus. Keep this connecting function of Saturn in mind.
126
Neptune
Note Neptune is the rising planet, conjunct the Ascendant by 3 degrees.
Given what we have said about Maya Angelou being her own created character, this Neptune
placement is very apt. The Ascendant and Neptune are in Leo, ruled by the Sun. Much of her public
persona was created through her writing. She is her own greatest fictional creation. Neptune on the
Ascendant connects to Sun and Jupiter in the ninth house of publishing and writing.
Note that Neptune and the Ascendant make a grand fire trine with the Jupiter - Sun
conjunction and with Saturn, linking the first, fifth and ninth houses . This further
emphasizes the importance of the pivotal connecting function of Saturn.
---
This brings us to the year 1968, the focus of our study.
Angelou was close friends with Martin Luther King and worked with him. King had asked Angelou to
organize a march, and she had stalled in doing it.
 Martin Luther King was assassinated on Maya Angelou's birthday , April 4, 1968, and
after that she did not celebrate her birthday, but always sent some kind of remembrance to King's
widow.
On the next page is the profected chart for 1968 in a bi-wheel with her natal chart.
127
The profected Ascendant is in the 5th house, Sagittarius, ruled by Jupiter, and LOY Jupiter is conjunct
the Sun, which is also activated. Very important, note that Saturn is in Sagittarius in this house. Those
three planets, Saturn, Sun and Jupiter, will be central to the rest of the symbolism of the year. Jupiter
being LOY activates the other house that Jupiter rules - Pisces, the eighth house. 
Looking at the rest of the chart, profected Jupiter and Sun are on the Ascendant, profected Saturn is
conjunct natal Jupiter and Sun, and profected Ascendant and Neptune are near Saturn. The grand
fire trine has rotated around in the profected chart to align with itself . That will happen
with the profected chart every four years, which is 120 degrees of rotation.
The profected South Node is sitting on the Sun Jupiter conjunction. In traditional astrology the South
Node is of the nature of Saturn and is considered to diminish or suck the life out of the points it hits.
Noted that the profected Venus/Mercury conjunction has moved to the twelfth house - the twelfth will
feature very prominently in what follows.
This next chart is Maya Angelou's solar return for the day Martin Luther King was shot and killed.
128

Consider the twelfth house, where the Sun is in Aries applying to a tight conjunction to Saturn. The
Sun is exalted, a word that is sometimes translated royalty or king, and Saturn is in fall, meaning
casting down or falling from prominence, in the twelfth house of hidden enemies - the King was
cast down by a hidden enemy. The planet Saturn is associated with the metal lead, and
King was killed by a lead bullet. The sign Aries is associated with the head and face,
and the bullet hit King in the cheek.
The literalness of the symbolism is chilling.
Angelou spent much of the time after King was shot in a deep depression, staying in her room, not
eating, not bathing, not answering the phone. She was cajoled out of this situation by her writer friend
James Baldwin, who talked her into going to a party.
It was at this party, in late 1968, that the interchange and challenge from her friends took place that
led to her writing her first autobiography, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings, which was published in
1969 or 1970 - I have seen both dates online. This book was nominated for a National Book Award in
1970, spent a couple of years on best-seller lists, and brought her international recognition and
acclaim.
Given that background we can now go more deeply into the chart configuration.
Profected sign of year, Sagittarius, is in the solar return eighth house, associated with death,
helplessness and loss. (Recall that we saw an eighth house connection in the profected chart, where
129

that is the other house ruled by LOY Jupiter.) The profected sign of the year is Sagittarius. We saw that
Saturn was activated by being in Sagittarius in her natal chart, and have already seen part of the
extreme importance of Saturn in the SR. 
The malefic Mars, Lord of the solar return twelfth house, is in detriment in Taurus and sitting right on
the Ascendant. Mars also rules the seventh house of close partners, and also of open enemies. 
Venus and Mercury are conjunct in Pisces in the solar return as in the natal, but in the SR they are in
the 11th house of friends, groups and gatherings -  this connotes the party she went to where James
Baldwin suggested she write the book that became C aged Bird.  Those two planets are opposite Pluto
and Uranus in 5th house (associated with creativity in modern astrology), and square to the Moon in
the second, part of a major aspect configuration we will see featured when we look at bi-wheels with
the natal chart.
Angelou isolated herself for a long period in order to write the book, and that isolation shows up in the
SR chart in a couple of ways. The LOY Jupiter holed up in the fourth house at the bottom of the chart
shows the isolation, and also the period of depressed isolation right after the shooting. Isolation also
fits the symbolism of the Sun Saturn conjunction in the 12th. It is also mirrored in the profected chart,
where we saw  profected Venus and Mercury in the 12th house. As we have seen before with significant
events, the same quality is mirrored in multiple places.
The combined Sun - Saturn - twelfth house symbolism also fits the title of her book, about a Caged
Bird, and it fits the subject matter - both Saturn and the twelfth house are associated with slavery,
oppression and limitation, and her book is on her struggle to overcome those. The Sun Saturn
configuration will take on more meaning when we link it to her natal chart.
Consider the cover of the book, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings  - you need to picture or see it in
color to catch the symbolism. The cover shows the gold Sun emerging from a vivid red
background, and in front of them is the silhouette of a bird in flight, in black. Red, gold
and black are the colors associated with Aries, the Sun, and Saturn.
The symbolism of Sun and Saturn in the twelfth house resonates strongly through the events of this
year in multiple ways, and the main themes of her life that year are reflected in the solar return.
----
130
The next chart is a bi-wheel with the natal chart inner, solar return chart around the outside. LOY 
Jupiter is featured here in multiple ways. Jupiter from the solar return is sitting on the natal 
Ascendant, conjunct Neptune, repeating the configuration we saw with profected Jupiter on the 
Ascendant. Natal Jupiter is conjunct SR Saturn in the ninth house. Jupiter sitting on Neptune rising 
links to her symbolic autobiography - she took the loss and turned it into a book, which was her 
creation of her life as an autobiographical novel. Jupiter's natal location, conjunct the Sun in the ninth 
house, speaks of the core of the book being a spiritual affirmation of the worth and integrity of the 
human spirit to triumph over adversity, and in this chart we see both the adversity and the triumph in 
extreme form. We have already mentioned SR Saturn sitting right on Jupiter, and Saturn is also 
applying to a conjunction with SR North Node which magnifies its importance. Transiting north node 
was sweeping her ninth house Sun Jupiter during the year.
Solar return Venus and Mercury are very close to their natal position. We noted that they had moved
from the natal eighth house (death and suffering) to the SR eleventh (the party and her group support
from friends) and the same two planets are in the profected twelfth house. The symbolism of all of the
houses fits different aspects of her experience this year.
131

The SR Ascendant is in the tenth natal house, along with SR Mars, which is reflected in this being the
year that led to her rise to worldwide fame - and Mars links back to the early event, the rape that is a
central, dominating part of the book.
We mentioned the SR T pattern, Venus/Mercury opposite Uranus/Pluto and square the Moon. That
pattern is completed and triggered by the natal Saturn in Sagittarius, turning the T into a mutable
grand cross, including the important planets Venus and Mercury related to writing, the Moon to the
emotional hurt, and Saturn to both the tragedy, and the hard work and discipline that transmuted it
into art.
There is another important T configuration in the natal chart, with Pluto in 12th house as focus, square
to the Sun/Jupiter opposition to the Moon. This relates to King's death, and to her writing about
slavery and oppression. This is completed, or rather triggered, by the SR MC axis hitting the 4th point
of the T. Crossing the 2 charts, 2 different T squares are completed, and we have two different grand
cross configurations here in the combination of the two charts.
----
The chart on the top of the next page switches the two wheels, and puts the SR chart in the inner wheel
and the natal in the outer.
132
We already mentioned Mercury and Venus in the solar return 11th house. Here we see the link between
the between 9th and 12th houses, since the 9th house Jupiter/Sun conjunction has moved to the SR
12th. This shows her spiritual purpose in overcoming slavery, hardship and spiritual oppression with
her strong sense of inner worth and purpose. The natal Midheaven is here in the SR first house, related
to her coming to extreme public prominence.
Note that the natal grand fire trine now falls in the solar return fourth, eighth and
twelfth houses.  The natal grand trine in the houses of identity and self-expression, creativity, and
spiritual ideals, is linked here with the houses of isolation, death, seclusion and endings.
----
We have consistently seen how very important the planet Saturn is in this series of charts. It will be
interesting to see if there is any connection with Saturn in the primary directions for the year. I ran the
directions for both angles and for the important planets Mercury, Venus, Jupiter and Saturn, and this
is what I found.
133

Primary Directions for 1985
Asc - Mars(Virgo)/Venus
MC - Saturn(Gemini)/Venus
Sun - Saturn(Taurus)/Venus
Moon - Mercury(Scorpio)/Mars
Ven - Saturn(Aries)/Saturn
Mer - Saturn(Aries)/Saturn
Jup - Saturn(Taurus)/Venus
Sat - Saturn(Cap)/Venus
The heavy predominance of Saturn is obvious, and it is noteworthy how often Saturn is paired with
Venus as partner - the tragedy, the hard work, and the art and poetry. 
Here are the directed points placed as symbols around a bi-wheel with the natal inner, SR outer.
134

The directions for the Venus/Mercury pair are particularly noteworthy - Venus and Mercury have
directed to Aries and the ninth house, so they are now in the same house as natal Sun
and Jupiter. Both directed planets are now trine natal Saturn, so they are poised to
work together - and Saturn has Venus as partner planet.
Note the locations and configurations of these other directed points.
The directed Ascendant is conjunct SR Uranus-Pluto and opposite SR and natal Mercury - Venus.
Directed Saturn is conjunct the SR Midheaven.
Directed Sun and Jupiter are opposite SR Neptune. We saw repeated connections of these three
planets in previous charts.
Directed Moon is opposite the natal Midheaven -  I associate the Moon down at the bottom of the chart
with the isolation and seclusion, and also with her going deeply into her childhood emotional
memories, and into her ancestry.
The directed Midheaven is conjunct the SR Moon, and square the two ends of the opposition of
Mercury - Venus and Uranus - Pluto. 
Every one of these directed planets forms a significant degree aspect to one of the
major configurations we discussed.
135
I want to close this section by comparing two other solar returns. The first is for 1937, the year of the
childhood rape incident. The second is for 1970, the year that Caged Bird received a National Book
Award nomination and reached worldwide fame.
Solar Return April 4, 1937, 6:17 PM. Solar Return, April 4, 1970, 6:17 PM.
The 1937 chart has Ascendant 13 Libra 41. The 1970 chart has Ascendant 13 Libra 48.
The two Ascendants are conjunct to within seven minutes.
The events of 1937 were re-presented, took on new life, in the book that reached world fame in 1970.
136

Conclusions and Questions
In this section I want to touch on some general conclusions I have drawn about predictive work. I also
want to raise some questions I have about how these techniques, especially primarily directions and
the use of the bounds, might be considered in further research.
Prediction Techniques Work Best Responding to Questions
This is an important general conclusion I have reached about astrology in general, and it is especially
applicable when dealing with the massive amount of data involved in correlating all these predictive
systems. The system works best when the techniques are focused by the use of a specific question,
topic or concern that a person brings to the table. General, open-ended readings of the "tell me what
will happen" type do not work anywhere near as well as focused readings. The significations of
astrology symbolism are broad and multivalent, and they need a question to focus the interpretation. 
This focus on topics matches how the chart examples are worked in this book. What I know about a
particular period of a person's life in the example gives the focus, and the charts are read from that
point of view. That is true when studying the known life of an historical figure, and it is true in an
effective reading where the client is deeply involved and provides the area for focus.
Go for the Big Points
When you combine this many charts and systems - natal chart, directions on multiple points,
profection and solar return - and then you stir in real time transits and directions for smaller periods,
the sheer amount of information and number of combinations is overwhelming. When I am dealing
with a set of charts for a reading I first concentrate just on the things that jump out at me, the big
correlations - planets right on angles, dignity or debility of LOY, major tight aspect patterns - and I pay
special attention whenever I see the same factor or mix of factors coming up repeatedly, across
multiple systems. With aspects  between charts I mainly use the major hard aspects, conjunction,
opposition and square. When I have a specific topic to focus on and have done a general survey I
sometimes go into further detail than that, but very often just the big picture points tell the story.
This is why I find it so very useful to have a question or area of concern from the client to have a focus -
that helps me figure out what to focus on and what to ignore. I have often had the uncanny experience
of feeling like the chart is guiding me to the important points, the ones that apply just at that spot in
the reading. You could call that guidance or intuition, but it only works if I have done my homework
and am familiar with the overall chart configuration.
137
Using Direction Through the Bounds
These two points about primary directions are very important and worth re-emphasizing here.
First -
Primary directions are concerned with periods of time rather than specific points or
events.
And second - 
The bound lords are the most important rulers to consider in primary directions to
determine how a specific period of time works out.
The base principle is that the directions through bounds as a set gives the overall tone, themes, and
working conditions for a time period. It is a way of taking the annual timing tools of profections and
solar returns and giving them a larger framework. 
In any given chart, and at any given time, the particular planetary directions that are important will
vary. Directing the Ascendant is the most generally useful point, and I use it very regularly in client
work - though, as I pointed out, it is not always easy to interpret with celebrity charts where we often
do not have the information on the overall meaning of the person's life as it appears to that person.
I now usually look at what I consider the Big Four points - Ascendant, Midheaven, Sun and Moon -
and we touched on their general significance in the introductory part of this study. The first two points,
Ascendant and Midheaven, are the most consistently meaningful.  I also pay attention to stressed
directions of the Moon if there are health concerns, or issues with problems like depression.
I am convinced that it is also worth looking at any planets that are particularly highlighted and active
in a given year in the solar return and profections, or standout planets in the natal chart like
Belafonte's Sun - Jupiter configuration. 
In looking at the bound lord and participator active at a given time, It is important to consider each of
their conditions and the natal relationship between them to see how the two planets will work together
- we saw that in the study of the Las Vegas shooting with the Sun and Saturn. A supportive partner
planet can make a big difference in how a bound lord works out, and vice-versa. We also saw that the
condition and relationship of the two in the active solar return is also worth considering.
Using the Bounds in Other Contexts
I am increasing convinced of the importance of the not-so-minor dignity of bounds in general. They
are the most under-rated and under used of the minor dignities. The bounds are very useful for
showing how a planet actually implements or is expressed - not ruling, but implementing - and in that
area, they are very important and need much more research. (See my book on Using Dignities in
Traditional Astrology for further research on the bound.)
138
Just as the bounds are important in the natal chart, it is worth considering the bounds in other
predictive charts, like the solar returns and profections. I have not pursued that in detail, and it is yet
another area that needs more research.
It is worth exploring use of the bounds with other timing techniques like secondary progressions. I am
particularly intrigued by the notion of looking at the bounds in solar arc directions, which is a kind of
modern equivalent to the kinds of things that primary directions do. I know from experience that solar
arc directions can be very effective. If I am right, then noting when a planet changes bound lords
should be worth noting there also. 
Remember that primary directions, profections, secondary progressions, solar arc directions, are all
different varieties of symbolic movement through time, with a very heavy emphasis on symbolic.
Once you grant the validity of symbolic directions in general, there is no a priori reason why the
bounds should be significant with this one technique and not with others, or why one particular
direction technique is "real" while others are "fantasy". 
How Aspects Work
Regarding the use of the partner planet with directions, the working rule is that the last aspecting
planet continues to have an effect until the next aspect perfects. I wonder if this should lead us to re-
think how aspects work in any context. The usual modern approach seems to be to view an aspect as
most important while it is applying and then briefly after it perfects, and then to view it as rapidly
dropping off in significance as it separates. The use of the partner in directing the bounds is very, very
different. Modern astrology considers aspects as points in time, traditional astrology
considers aspects as periods of time. Again, this needs more research.
The series of aspects to partners that a directed point makes has parallels to the series of aspects that
the Moon makes in the context of interpreting a horary chart. There the last perfected aspect continues
to have an effect until the next aspect is made. Perhaps this principle of aspect perfection can be
generalized.
Aspects, Periods and Returns
There is a similar difference in thinking about how returns work. Modern astrologers tend to think of a
planet's return as it coming to a specific degree, while traditional astrologers think of returns as
applying to an entire sign. For example, I consider the period of a Saturn return to apply to the entire
time it transits its home sign, a period of around 2-1/2 years. The point of Saturn's return to its degree
location is an important point of extra emphasis, but it is best understood within the whole time
period.
139
Bound Lord Changing Signs
Another question is the significance of a directed point changing signs along with bounds. To my
knowledge this is not generally noted in the traditional material on directing the bounds, and that is
another area that could use further research. I know that noting when a planet changes signs in
secondary progressions is a consistently significant marker for starting a new phase. Just as changing
bounds could be considered in secondary progressions, changing signs could be considered in
directions through the bounds.
Location of Directed Point on Natal and Other Charts
Along with considering the changes of bound lord and partner, it is definitely worth looking at the
specific location on the chart that the given point is directed to. We saw this in the examples with
Monroe, and with Harry Belafonte, and very, very significantly in the freaky set of correlations with the
Las Vegas shooting and Stephen Paddock's charts, and with the Maya Angelou 1968 series.
It is worth drawing in the directed planets on the outside of the wheel around the natal or other chart
being considered, the way we used to do with progressions and transits back in the old days before
computer programs came up with multi wheel charts.
Directing the Outer Planets
So far, with the very noteworthy exception of Neptune in the Monroe study we looked at, I have done
very, very little with including the three modern outer planets in directions, either as points to direct,
or as points aspecting the directed point. This is another area for further inquiry. By definition the
outer planets cannot be bound lords, and I seriously doubt whether they should be considered as
candidates for partners, but directing the outer planets themselves is an open area. 
The modern version of the Morinus program includes the modern planets. The traditional version
does not. I have both versions, but I use the traditional version almost exclusively. 
To clarify my own take on the three modern planets - I do use the outer planets in my chart
interpretation, as in the examples here, but I do not consider them to have any dignity or sign
rulership, and thus they are not candidates for being time lords in directions, profections, or solar
revolutions.
Profecting the Entire Chart
In this book I have focused on the main use of profections, which is to determine the profected sign of
the year and the Lord of the Year, which will be the main focus in the context of solar returns.
In some of the examples I have considered the meaning of the profected chart of a whole. There is
historical precedent for this - Valens profects points other than the Ascendant, and William Lilly
profects all of the points in the chart, and his example interpretations he is clearly looking at the
140
profected chart as a whole. I have pushed the technique a bit further here in considering the profection
as an entire valid chart in its own right, and my findings so far support its significance. This is another
area that needs further exploration.
Combining the Cycle of the Year with Secondary Progressions
In my personal astrology practice I use these techniques as the center of my predictive work. I also
combine them with the use of secondary progressions. I find those to be consistently useful, especially
progressed lunar phases, and planets either stationing or changing signs. There is precedent for using
secondary progressions in Valens, but they were not as consistently used in the general tradition until
relatively recently.
Secondary Progressions as a Time Lord System
Given the nature of symbolic directions, and that primary directions and profections are time lord
systems, it makes sense to re-think secondary progressions in a similar manner. Modern astrology
tends to look at progressions in the same way as transits, with aspects approaching exact, perfecting
and then separating. When I use progressions I pay most attention to how they affect periods of time.
For example, the Sun changing signs marks a distinct change in tone and emphasis that is in effect for
around thirty years. It is worth taking the sign change, and interpreting it in terms of a change in the
time lord over the Sun for the new sign - where is the ruler, what condition is it in, and so on.
The Cycle of the Year and Modern Astrology
Do these traditional techniques also work in the context of a modern astrology approach? Yes,
emphatically so.
There are some important dimensions of traditional predictive technique that greatly enrich modern
astrology, especially the concepts of time lords and periods rather than points of time.
Going the other way, some of the psychological developments of modern astrology have validity and
shed further light on some of the traditional techniques. For example, I am convinced that the bound
lord partner has an inner, psychological dimension along with its traditional meaning of referring to
other people or groups that affect that point. The different approaches are complementary and can
benefit from being used together.
---
I hope that I have introduced you to some useful techniques to deepen and enrich your astrology
predictive practice, and some new ways of thinking about how astrology works.
Enjoy.
141
142
Where to Go from Here
This section lists further resources for further pursuing the topics covered in this book.
For a general introduction to traditional astrology and to using dignities to evaluate a chart, I
recommend my first two books. These three books together are intended as a series.
Charles Obert, Introduction to Traditional Natal Astrology. Almuten Press, 2015.
_________ , Using Dignities In Astrology. Almuten Press, 2018.
I regularly teach classes at Kepler College on this predictive technique and on using dignities - you can
find out about them at their site, https://keplercollege.org/.
This is a conversation I had with Chris Brennan about Essential Dignities on his astrology podcast -
http://theastrologypodcast.com/2018/05/10/essential-dignities-and-debilities-with-
charles-obert/
 I highly recommend the Seven Stars Astrology website, http://www.sevenstarsastrology.com/. 
This site has many outstanding articles and presentations on traditional astrology topics, including 
excellent material on profections, revolutions, and directions.
For more advanced information on Solar Revolutions and on Directions, explore the work of Ben
Dykes. His audio programs and books are available at his website, https://bendykes.com. The
following four audio programs are recommended.
- FAA 2010 Introduction to Solar Revolutions
- Primary Directions Without Tears
- Workshop: Distributions Through the Bounds
- Workshop: Elements of Solar Revolutions
- See also this translation by Ben Dykes: Persian Nativities 3: On Solar Revolutions: Abu
Mashar's On the Revolutions of the Years of Nativities . Cazimi Press, 2010. This book is the
fullest presentation of the Cycle of the Year that I am aware of.
The standard book on Primary Directions is by Martin Gansten - Primary Directions: Astrology's
Old Master Technique, Wessex Astrologer, 2009.
For profections in particular, and Hellenistic astrology in general, the work of Chris Brennan is
noteworthy. Chris goes much further into the use of profections by themselves as a predictive tool.
143
- Chris has a two hour podcast on Profections available for free here - 
http://theastrologypodcast.com/2018/04/26/annual-profections-a-basic-time-lord-
technique/
- Chris has a very thorough online course on Hellenistic Astrology - 
https://courses.theastrologyschool.com/courses/hellenistic-astrology-course
-  The module on Profections from that course is also available separately - 
https://courses.theastrologyschool.com/courses/annual-profections-timing-technique-
class
 - Chris Brennan also wrote the book, Hellenistic Astrology: The Study of Fate and Fortune. 
Amor Fati Press, 2017.
144
Table of Essential 
Dignities.
145

146
Using the Morinus Astrology Program
There are two versions of Morinus, modern and traditional. The modern version, includes the 3 outer
planets, and the traditional version does not.  
I highly suggest starting with the traditional version. The modern version adds lines in directions for
the Descendant whenever the Ascendant is chosen, and that can be confusing until you know how to
weed it out.  Also, the traditional method of using directions does not include the outer planets, and
the outer planets are not considered as partner or participating planets.
This is the link to get the traditional version.
 - https://sites.google.com/site/tradmorinus/morinus (for Windows - download MorinusWin.zip - the
link is at the bottom of the page. )
Put the file where you want the program and unzip the file. The program, morinus.exe, is in the folder
and is ready to run.
For instructions on setting up and using Morinus on a Mac, see the following sites:
- https://code.google.com/archive/p/morinus-astro/
- http://astro-morinus.blogspot.com/
- https://kb.wisc.edu/helpdesk/page.php?id=25443
To set up the minor dignities correctly, go to the Options menu to Minor Dignities, and make sure
Triplicity is set to Dorothean, bound to Egyptian, and Face to Chaldean. In the Options menu, for
Primary Keys, I have been using Ptolemy static key with good results.
Also in the Options Menus, go to Appearance 1, and turn on the check box to display the ring with the
Terms (same as bounds). You can check Face if you use all of the essential dignities and want to see
those in a ring. This is also the place where you can choose to see your charts either in color or in black
and white.  If you are going to be printing images, I find that black and white prints much more clearly.
147
1) Enter your chart data - here is a snapshot of the data entry screen for a natal chart. Enter the exact
latitude and longitude for the location, and set the correct time zone offset in the second column. A
time zone West of Greenwich is minus, East of Greenwich is plus.  You can use a chart from the free
site astro.com, or from another astrology program to get the necessary latitude, longitude and time
zone data to enter.
In the middle column, below the pull-down that says Gregorian, make sure your choose Zone
for almost all modern charts, which use standard time zones.  For birth data prior to the use of
time zones, choose Local Mean here.
Belafonte was born in New York City which is Eastern Standard Time, 5 hours earlier than
Greenwich time. For this chart GMT is marked as minus 5 hours. If Daylight Savings time
applies, you can use the standard 5 hour time zone offset and check the Daylight Savings box,
or you can leave Daylight Savings unchecked and adjust the time zone offset to 4 hours. 
148
Here is Belafonte's birth chart image from Morinus. The bounds are the irregularly sized areas near
the outside of the ring. The Ascendant, marked as a left arrow, is currently in the bounds of Jupiter.
Moving counter-clockwise, the next bound after that is Venus, then Mars, and so on. The dignity of
face is shown in the ring inside the bounds, in which the signs are divided into three sections of ten
degrees each.
In the chart pictured below the Midheaven is in Aquarius, in the bounds of Jupiter and the face of
Mercury.
Primary Directions
Go to the Options menu and choose Primary Directions. Set them up as shown here.
149
Set the left column up as shown - Placidus(semiarc), Zodiacal using latitude of neither, and at bottom,
aspects of Promissors to Significators
In the second column, under Promissors, select all the planets, and also select bounds (listed as Terms,
the other name for this dignity) in the second column. Note that you can also do directions to the lunar
nodes or antiscia points. Finally, and most important, select Terms.
In the third column select all aspects except Parallel. The traditional version of Morinus has only the
major Ptolemaic aspects.
The right column is where you check the point or points you wish to direct. In this example the
Ascendant is checked in the right column as the only significator - I suggest you start there. This right
column is the only one you need to adjust going forward.
150
When you run the primary directions from the Tables menu, the program has you choose 25 year
blocks of time.  Or, if you just choose a range of 1 to 100, you can get the entire set of distributions for a
lifetime in a single listing.  If you right-click on the resulting listing, it can be saved as a bitmap or as
plain text.
The default is to choose only direct, following the movement of the zodiac through the day. You also
have the option of doing converse directions, which rotates the wheel in the opposite direction.
Here is an image of the directions for the most active period of Belafonte's professional life as a singer.
In the first column, the glyph of a sign is shown each time the Ascendant moves into a different bound.
The other line items show an aspect symbol each time the Ascendant makes a Ptolemaic aspect to a
planet. The D with the arrow in the second column means these are Direct - there is another style of
directions called Converse which moves in the opposite direction. The third column shows the directed
point (in this case the Ascendant), the fourth column shows the number of degrees of arc the point has
moved from the natal chart, and the final column shows the date this direction corresponds to. 
Refer back to the wheel of the chart while you read this listing, and pick out the bounds and aspects.
That will help you understand the listing.
On  April  26,  1948  the
distribution  entered  the
bounds of Mars, in the sign
Cancer.  In  July  1952  the
Ascendant  made  a  square
aspect to Venus, which became
the partner planet. in February
1956 the Ascendant moved into
the bounds of Venus, with
Venus still the partner planet.
In July 1959 the Ascendant
made a trine aspect to Jupiter,
which  then  became  the
partner.
Here is the text file showing the same information as in the above screen snap for the first four lines.
(The "Z" stands for Zodiacal directions. - there is another form of directions called Mundane.)
Z (Cancer)Mars D --> Asc 21.156134 1948.04.26
Z Square Venus D --> Asc 25.386705 1952.07.19
Z (Cancer)Venus D --> Asc 28.982617 1956.02.23
Z Trine Jupiter D --> Asc 32.343921 1959.07.05
All lines with a sign name in parentheses indicate moving into a bound. All other lines indicate an
aspect or conjunction, which means the partner planet changing at that point.
151

The Cycle of the Year with Morinus - Profections and Revolutions
Once you have a natal chart loaded and calculated, Morinus also does a very nice job creating charts
for revolutions - for solar, or any other planet - and profections. Both can be accessed from the Charts
menu.
Instructions for Running a Solar Return
On the menu, go to Charts -> Revolutions - this opens a dialog box for you to enter the date. The one
little quirk to be careful of here is that the program gives you a starting date the day AFTER the birth
date, searching forward in time from there. I usually put it a day or two prior to the birthday for the
year you want.
Expand the image. You can right click on the image to save it as a file - it is a good idea to make the
image large on the screen to get a larger saved image.
152

Right click on the chart, and choose Window -> Comparison, and you will see a bi-wheel. This gives
the natal chart in the inner ring, and the planets of the Solar Return in the outer ring, as shown below.
Directing a point around the Solar Return chart over a year.
Right click on the solar return chart and choose, Directions-> direct. This gives a listing of the chosen
directed point around the solar return for the year. The format is the same as for the regular direction
through the bounds, but the point moves the entire 360 degrees of the circle in the course of the year.
It is the annual equivalent of the lifetime directions. Below is a sample - the solar return Ascendant
starts in Mars bounds on March 1, moves to a sextile of Venus March 5, enters Saturn bounds on
March 7, and so on.
Z Sextile Venus D --> Asc 4.312176 1956.03.05
Z (Gemini)Saturn D --> Asc 6.709430 1956.03.07
Z Sextile Jupiter D --> Asc 7.539264 1956.03.08
Z Trine Moon D --> Asc 9.173594 1956.03.09
Z (Cancer)Mars D --> Asc 13.095236 1956.03.13
153

Instructions for Running Profections
Go the Charts menu and select Profections. Choose the birth date for the year you want.
Along with the chart, you will see a little control panel pop-up, pictured below, that lets you advance
the profection a year, a month, or a day at a time. This makes it easy to run profections for a series of
years.
As with the solar return, you can right click on the wheel and choose window->comparison to get a bi-
wheel with the natal in the center and profection around the outer edge. That image is not shown here
since it has the same format as the solar return comparison wheel.
154

If you want to quickly check profections for a series of dates, go to the Tables menu and
choose profections. You get a table like the following, that shows profections for the main 5
points for a series of years in groups of 12.
The ++ button in the little window on the right lets you move forward in blocks of 12 years at a
time. This shows simply how profections work.
There is a further level of profections, that I do not cover in this book, that takes a single year
and moves the profected sign around the wheel at the rate of one sign per month. With the
above table, clicking on an age in the left column shows you the dates of the monthly
profections. 
155

156
157
158
159
160