NAADI JYOTISHA 
(Based on Brighu I Nandi Nadi System) 
by 
SAlYANARAYANA NAIK 
Includes Kerala Occult Sciences, Tropical Chart Discussions, Dating Back Astrology 
by team members 
Sri Lenin Varghese, Sri Shiva Kumar, Sri U. Someshwar, Sri Kumar Vasisht 
Preface by Contributors 
"A teacher is one who makes himself progressively unnecessary"' 
~fWT~: 
(learning is enhanced by practical accomplishments) 
It is a proud privilege for us to be a part of this great work on Naadi Astrology. This work is like 
an epic because it is a reproduction of the experiments conducted at the workshops and classrooms. 
The concept of teaching was based on interactive method and every one of us was given equal 
opportunity to express doubts, experiment with new ideas and address the class with practical case 
studies. 
The approach to the subject Naadi Astrology by Guruji is unique. With his metaphysical approach, 
he has proved the unification of macrocosm and microcosm. Convincingly he has established that 
the time and space concept in relation to planets & zodiac, their symbolic representation to entire 
universe including human being on earth and theory of karma are integral part of Naadi astrology. 
He has simply fit the science in to Astrology, instead of framing Astrology as science. 
This original work on Naadi astrology by Guruji is a work of magnum opus in the field of Naadi 
Astrology. He has used some of the principles from scholarly works for which due credits with 
appropriate reference is given. 
Often Guruji says "by blowing trumpets on correct predictions, does not end the responsibility 
of Astrologer. Counselling and comforting with solutions is the ultimate karma of Astrologer". 
Therefore he has included his monumental research work on gem prescription and remedial 
measures in this present book. Apart from this, he has initiated the structured format of 
conventional astrology, and has introduced the expertise of Kerala system on which the next project 
is proposed in association with Sri Shiva Kumar and Sri Lenin Varghese. The introductory works of 
Sri Shiva Kumar and Sri.Lenin Varghese are appended to this book. This introductory chapter deals 
with the approach to conventional astrology propounded by sages adopted in Kerala state with 
conviction and authority on this subject. A few wonderful remedies from Kerala have been included 
in this book. 
Experiments with tropical charts have been discussed, with Sri.U.Someswar one of the disciples of 
Guruji. This chapter gives us the insight into the variations in application and its effect. 
Sri.U.Someswar is a practicing Naadi Astrologer, having wide practical experience in chart analysis 
and palm reading. 
Every chapter has new learning and every chart has new technique of approach for delineation. 
It is therefore recommended to study carefully all chapters sequentially, instead of random surfing. 
We are anticipating that the next project of our Guruji and his team, on conventional astrology will 
be completed soon and we also wish to be part of that project. 
We are extremely thankful to "Jyotirvastu Vignana Samstha" and "Shravana Astrological 
lnstitute'who have provided the opportunity to conduct classes in Naadi Astrology. 
Collectively we feel delighted having introduced this book to the readers across the world. 
We remain 
Always in the service of lord 
Foreword from Dr. T.S.Vasan 
D.Sc. B.L., Ph.D.,(Brussels), Ph.D.,(USA), FRAS(London), Jyothisha Bhanu, Jyothisha Bhushana, 
Professor Emeritus, Viae-President ICAS, Jyothir Vidyalankara, Samudrika Bhushana, 
Jyothir Vidya Visharada, Bhagya-Vid-Mani, Jyothish Vachaspathi, Jyotishacharya, 
Jyothisha Sarva Bhouma, Jyothish Chandrashekar, Jyothisha Brahma Gnani, Recipient of Thamrapatra, 
Medals & shields, Han. Director of Studies, Research a Therapy. 
The Naadi system is a unique system of predictive astrology and the techniques found in different 
nadies are varied and different. When compared to our classical texts, this system seems to be very 
challenging and has deeper insight in the interpretative methodology. Prof.R.G.Rao has spent major 
part of his life in understanding the deeper meanings, methodologies, significance and underlying 
features in nadies in deciphering planetary codes, symbolisms, karakatwas and combinations as 
applied and found in the nadi granthas or palm leaves. 
His student Sri.Satyanarayana Naik has systematically arranged the subject and also has created 
a clean platform for the understanding of nadi system and techniques as propounded by 
Prof.R.G.Rao. He, with examples has shown how graha-karakatwas and rasi-karakatwas interact with 
each other to produce the results. The basic ideology apart from the above is to find the relationship 
of planets occupying 2, 5, 7,9,11, and 12 houses mutually. When they have relationship mutually, 
they produce good and bad results depending upon the combination of planets. Some plants are 
destiny makers with their combinations and other may be destiny modifiers or breakers. In this 
connection, he has given elaborate tables to understand the intricacies and significations in blending 
of karakatwas. 
The special features in this work are to understand the most important portfolios of the planets, 
in relation to human aspects of life, and the karma effect on the human being and their identification 
through planets. For example, in male/female and in female charts, Jupiter represents Jeevakaraka 
and Venus also becomes Jeevakaraka in female charts. Saturn is karma karaka and also indicates 
delay & laziness in both male and female charts. In this book, Jeeva and Karma group is represented 
by the above planets Jupiter/Venus and Saturn. 
Sun represents government, fame, sucoess and for living matters, it signifies Father and Son in both 
male and female charts. Venus also represents luxuries & affluence in male/female charts and signify 
wife in a male chart. Mercury signifies intelligent, commerce, younger siblings, and friends in both 
male and female charts. In this work, these three planets are called destiny-makers. 
Mars while representing the ego, fury, enmity, quarrel and brother factors in both male and female 
charts, predominantly signify husband in female chart. The Moon signifies mind, divinity, 
capriciousness, adultery, cheating, loss, and Mother in both male and female charts. 
These two are aptly termed as destiny-modifiers. 
The Rahu indicates, shadow, illusions (Maya), de-linking, unethical and foreign matters. Ketu 
represents dejections, disputes, divorce, bondage, & salvation (Moksha). These two planets are 
destiny-breakers. 
Mr. Naik has introduced this grouping system and has woven the material and metaphysical concepts 
Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha vii 
to interpret the effects of karma and freewill while analysing the horoscope. With the elaborate 
karakatwa tables given in this book, all the aspects of life like, health, ailments, blood relations, 
position, power, finance, foreign, travel, luxuries can be dealt in a meticulous way. The author has 
also provided enough examples to cover almost all the departments of life. 
In this system, timing of event based on transit of planets is a wonderful concept. The author has 
given a detailed methods and rules to pin point the periods of fructifying events. 
Gruha Vastu, Gems application, Yoga, and other remedial measures are included in this work, which 
will be very useful to the readers. 
I congratulate the author for having taken so much of pains in compiling this stupendous work on 
nadi system of astrology. I also look forward for many research-oriented works from the author in 
future. Lastly, I can say this is a best book for understanding the nadies and the nadi system. 
With Best Wishes, 
DR.T.S.VASAN 
143-A-17, 261h Cross, 2"d Block, 
Rajajinagar, Bangalore-560 010. 
Phone : 080-2332 5452 
Mobile : 98667 75452 
?J(ui~l ?J(ifcfwi) ?J(i~cjj 4~:tct<: 1 
!FW'ffrl. q<¢1@1 "fRitit ~ ¥T: II 
Guruji Sri R.G. Rao 
Our Guru Shri R.G. Rao of Bangalore has written many books and we would like to discuss few points 
about his works. In spite of having considerable knowledge in the conventional astrology, Guruji 
had some sort of dissatisfaction with regard to perfect applications of rules. Later through palmistry, 
he could get some satisfaction. Nevertheless, deep in his heart there was quest to find out the truth 
behind the astrology and palmistry. He was astonished by the Naadi reading of his life sketch during 
1961. This made him to search for truth behind naadi system. He started studying many Naadi 
granthas. His efforts came to light through the works on Bhrigu and Nandi Naadi. The secret was 
revealed to him by the grace of his mentor "Sadhu Bala Krishna Das"ofTryambakam math. Sri.H.S. 
Madhu Rao of Mysore initiated Guruji with knowledge of "tarka" (logic) which helped Guruji to 
experiment on the karakatwa of planets. He has selected some portions from Bhrighu and some 
portions from Nandi Naadi and derived a separate system styled as "Rao's system of Naadi 
Astrology". He has published the book titled "Bhrigu Nandi Naadi." This work of Guruji is like a magic 
lamp containing wonderful secrets. The book deals with more than 500 horoscopes and with simple 
rules of delineations. However, this needed some guiding factor and to fulfil this gap Guruji wrote 
another book "Fortune telling from the Permutation &: Combination of Planets". This has created 
revolution in the history of astrology. Even a novice to the subject astrology could grasp the system 
of prediction by reading this book. Subsequently he has introduced timing of events through his book 
Transit of Planets on Thy Birth Chart'. In his quest to find the truth he tried to link, palmistry with 
Naadi, which were, discussed in some of the Naadi granthas. He brought out a wonderful book 
'Wonders of Life" co- relating palm lines depicting the planetary positions in the birth chart and 
predicting through palmistry. "Fortune from thy House" is another extraordinary work, which proved 
that Vastu (dwelling house) is closely, relates to signification of planets in Naadi astrology and lines 
in Palmistry. By reading his books, we have concluded that anything and everything in this universe 
closely related to significations of planets and zodiac signs. This has made us to proceed with 
experimentation on the works of Guruji. 
In the book "Fortune telling from the Permutation & Combination of Planets", the results are based 
on the combination of planets with their significations. Amazingly, Guruji assigns the planets and 
their significations to the lines and mounts in the palm. Apart from this, he also introduces face 
reading in one of his books. In face reading, again the planets are inter linked to the parts of the 
face. In his book "Fortune from thy house", he translates the signification of planets to the house 
plan and relates to the 8 directions of Vastu headed by the planets. Planetary signification is a part 
of this book and therefore, we give illustration of Palm, Face, and Vastu in relation to planets and 
Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha lX 
explain the common factor of signification of planets. This wonderful concept of integrated study 
of Astrology, Palmistry, Physiognomy, and Vastu is a magnum-opus work of Guruji Sri.R.G. Rao. 
The planetary signification remains the same as given in the astrology. The ridges on mount, their 
orientation, orientation of other small lines from mounts and major lines will indicate the links 
establishing with other planets, which will match with the horoscope. Rahu and Ketu indicate the 
marks shown above and their presence on the line or mount indicates the link of these nodes to 
that particular planet. 
Venus indicates cheeks, Saturn indicates chin, Sun indicates right eye, Moon indicates left eye, 
Jupiter indicates nose, Mars indicates eyebrows, Mercury indicates forehead, Ketu indicates hair, 
and Rahu indicates Mouth. The dimples, depressions, scar, protruding, cross, small or big etc., will 
indicate the linking factors of planets. The significations of planets are same as prescribed in Naadi 
astrology. Based on the links of planets on the face with the help of variations given above the 
delineations are made which will tally exactly with horoscope. 
Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Similarly, Vastu is considered based on the dwelling house. For this purpose, the directions of planets 
and the Vastu significations attributed in Naadi astrology are considered and predictions are made. 
A Vastu dial is given below. 
Apart from directional significations, the planets are designated with portions of the house. Based 
on the condition of the house and the directional placements predictions are made. This will give 
the present conditions of the native. The birit&tlf(lart and the hora chart will indicate the possible 
learning 
Pooja 
Toilet & Dump Bedroom 
changes, shifting, buying, and selling of dwelling house. 
There is no other work, which advocates signification of planets as common factor for integrated 
study of palmistry, horoscope, and Vastu. This is a fantastic and unique method, which has been 
proved to give unfailing results on repeated application of rules. These have been authenticated 
by many of his disciples with their satisfied clientele across the world. The entire credit goes to 
Sri R.G.Rao for his monumental works. 
"Bhrighu Prashna Naadi" of Guruji, though a small size book, is a masterpiece by itself. This book 
is like boon to students of astrology and professional astrologers. If nothing strikes to mind at the 
time of delineations, simply turn the page number denoting the reminder of completed age 
deducted from the total 108 and read the predictions. This will tally with the consultant's general 
life prediction for that year and it also gives the remedial measures to overcome the problems. 
This can also be used for monthly predictions, daily predictions using Sun and Moon. \To cite an 
example, instantly I consul.te.d.the. book based on today's Sun position and astonishingly the reading 
says, "This person who is questioning under the "Yoga" of ANGEERASA BUDDHI and this person 
have intellectual qualities ............. " This is how this wonder book works. 
Based on the works of Guruji, the present work is an extension and a guide developed with practical 
application and experiments, containing many untold secrets in Naadi astrology. Apart from this work 
"Prediction secrets- Naadi Astrology" and "Celestial Matrix" will give good knowledge in analysing 
horoscopes. We also recommend, adding to your library some of the works of Guruji Sri. R.G. Rao. 
The list is furnished below: 
Your destiny in Thumb 
2 Fortune from thy Face 
3 Samudrika Sudha 
4 Brihat Nadi Astrology 
5 In addition, the other books mentioned in the insider cover page. 
SATYANARYANA NAIK 
Acknowledgments 
I am extremely honoured to have a preface to this book by Dr. T.S. Vasan, D.Sc. B.L., Ph.D., (Brussels), 
Ph.D., (USA), FRAS (London), Vice-President, ICAS. 
Dr.Vasan is a stalwart in astrology and is well known in the astrological circles in India and abroad. 
He has to his credit innumerable awards and titles. He was kind enough to give his valuable time 
to read the entire book and write a preface for it. I thank him for his love and affection. 
The entire book is inspired by the support of students and participants. Therefore, I am extremely 
thankful to all of them. 
I am thankful to Sri Satyamma Bharadwaj who is extending his wholehearted support in spreading 
Naadi astrology in Hyderabad. 
I am ever grateful to Smt. lndirani Charya and Sri.N.S.Charya, who being my beloved family friends 
have always been supporting my endeavours and offered their help in proof reading many of my 
works including the present work. 
My sincere thanks to Smt. Madhavi Lata and Sri. Venkateshwar Rao, of Balaji Graphics, who have 
been contributing their quality DTP services to all my works and especially, they have extended 
their wholehearted cooperation in beautifully designing the present work. 
I am also indebted to the cooperation and remarkable contributions made by my close associates, 
Sri. Shivakumar, Sri.Lenin Varghese, Sri. Anil Kumar and Sri.U.Someshwar, Sri. Kumar Vasisht. 
My sincere thanks to my family members, Sri. Rajkumar and his Wife Smt.Chetna, Sri. Syam Agarwal 
and Smt. Nisha Agarwal for their unconditional support. 
I am thankful to Sri.Kondeti Nageshwar Rao garu, whose teachings inspired me to link yoga and karma 
in astrology. 
I am thankful to all the astrological institutions for the opportunities being provided to spread Naadi 
astrology. 
My special regard to Sri A.V.Sundaram, who always encourages me and supports research work in 
Naadi astrology. I am also thankful to my friend Sri.Ramchandar of Pottisriramulu university. 
My heartfelt regards to great astrological stalwarts in Hyderabad, Sri.V.B.N Sharma, Sri Rajender 
Nimje, Dr. C.V.B.Subrhamaniam, Sri.C.B.B.Subrhamaniam, Sri P.V.K Punneswara Rao, Sri.D.R.Chainulu 
and Sri. Raghunath Rao. 
My special thanks to Sri.Sehacharyulu, who has introduced me to astrological fraternity across the 
country by publishing my first book. 
My heartfelt regards to the following friends, whose association has given me inestimable logic to 
think and develop the subject. 
Sri Sadasivan Ravi, Sri.B.Amarnath Sastry, Sri.M.Ramachandramurti, Sri.K.N.Sudhakar, Sri.T.A.P.Rao, 
Sri.Ramaprasad, Sri.N.V.R.A.Raja, Sri.Vidyasagar, Sri.K.V.S.N.Murthy, Sri. Late Shivala Subramaniam, 
Sri. Late Jatar Ansari. 
I offer my special thanks to my daughter-in-law Smt. Vidya who helped me in deciding the title 
for this work. I am also thankful to my son Sudhama, daughter Gayati & son-in-law Guru for their 
support in all my activities. 
Last but not least my sincere thanks to Sh. Saurabh Sagar of SAGAR PUBUCATIONS for having 
published this book. 
SATYANARAYANA NAIK 
Om Sri Gururganesha 
Om Sri Lakshminarasimhaswamine namaha: 
Om Hreem Dum Durgaayei Nemaha 
REVELATION FROM NAADI JYOTISHA 
(Based on Brighu I Nandi Nadi System) 
Gururbramha gururvishnu gururdevomaheshwaraha; Gurursaakshath parabramha tasmal shree guravenamaha: 
Ekadantaaya vidmahe vakratundaaya dhee mahi tanno danti prachodayaath. 
Omnamo bhagavate vaasudevaaya, Omnamo bhagavate rudraaya, Om Hreem dum Ourgaaye namaha; 
Om Sri Lakshminarasimhaswamine nemaha: Nateyanti parabhavam· nateyanti parabhavam om nama iti: 
Neelanjana samaabhaasam ravi putram yamaagrajam, chaaya maartaanda sambhootam tarn namaml shanaishachram 
Devanamcha, Rishinaamcha, Guru kaanchana Snnibham buddhimantam trilokesham tarn namaami brihaspatim 
Dharanighrabha sambhootam vidyut kaanti Silma prabham kumaaram shakti has tam tarn mangalam pranamaamyaham 
Japaakusuma sankaasham kaashyapeyam mahadyutim tamori sarvapapaghnam pranatoasmi divaakaram 
Himakunda Mrinaalaabham Daityanaam paramam gurum sarvashaastraprvaktaaram bhaarghavam pranamaamyaham. 
Priyangu kalika shyamam roopenaam pratimam bhudham soumyam soumya gunopetham tarn bhudham pranamaamyaham 
Dadhi shankha tusharaabham, ksheerordaarnava Silmbhavam namaami shashinam somam shambhor mukuta bhooshanam 
Ardakaayam mahaaveeryam, chandraaditya vimardhanam simhikaa gharbha sambhootam tarn raahum pranamaamyaham 
Phalaasha pushpa sankaasham tarakaagrha mastakam roudram roudratmakam tarn ketum pranamaamyaham 
"Let the supreme powers energise the contents herein and bless the society in general and the reader in 
particular" 
My first book "PREDICTION SECRETS - NMDI ASTROLOGY'' was based on the works of Sri 
R. G. Rao. The response from the readers has given me strength and subsequently I have 
released another book "Celestial Matrix in Naadi Astrology" giving hints on making 
combination of planets for the effective karma in this birth. 
Repetitively working on this subject during the workshop sessions along with the students 
and practicing astrologers at Hyderabad, certain convincing factors when applied lead me 
to astonishing revelations. I believe in sharing all that bestowed upon me by the supreme 
cosmic power. The behavior of planets is so fascinating that it needs extra sensory powers 
to perceive their effects. During teaching and workshop sessions at "Jyothir Vastu Vignana 
Samstha", many more secrets and the fundamentals behind the karakatwa of planets have 
come to light. The whole concept of Naadi system of prediction has taken different shape 
revealing amazing secrets. We observed that this subject is beyond the conceptual level 
Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha X Ill 
of mind and has direct link to the ever changing cosmic evolution. Repetitively working 
on this subject during the workshop sessions along with the students and practicing 
astrologers at Hyderabad, certain convincing factors when applied lead me to astonishing 
revelations. I believe in sharing all that bestowed upon me by the supreme cosmic power. 
The behavior of planets is so fascinating that it needs extra sensory powers to perceive their 
effects. During teaching and workshop sessions at "Jyothir Vastu Vignana Samstha", many 
more secrets and the fundamentals behind the karakatwa of planets have come to light. 
The whole concept of Naadi system of prediction has taken different shape revealing 
amazing secrets. We observed that this subject is beyond the conceptual level of mind and 
has direct link to the ever changing cosmic evolution. Curiosity increased to further explore 
on this and the students have also shown more interest to go for further experimentation 
on these lines and joined me as a groop. The workshop has become an every Sunday culture 
for this group. Sri Lenin Verghese, Sri. Shiva Kumar, Sri. Someshwar and the participants 
of workshop are the main inspiring personalities whose intellectual questions have 
prompted me to come up with this present work. We have included a few questions from 
students and the answers to their questions have become chapters in this book. The second 
part of this book contains some of the contributions from the associates mentioned above. 
In Rao's system of Naadi astrology, karakatwa of nine planets are most importance. 
In the subsequent chapters, we have discussed metaphysical relationship with the 
Karma theory, astronomical structure, and symbolic representation of human 
elements by nine planets. This is not a different Naadi system. Since it is an 
extended research work on the original subject of Sri.R.G.Rao, we prefer to call 
it as "Navagraha Naadi" which is nothing but the advanced "Rao's system". 
CONTENTS 
1st Part 
Primer 
1. Fundamentals of General Astrology 
2. Basics of Naadi System of Astrology 
Astro-Metaphysics 
3. Core Logic behind Navagraha Naadi 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
Concept of Zodiac, Orbits and Time 
Karma and Planets in Navagraha Naadi 
Rashi Chakra (Zodiac) and Karma 
Celestial Orientation of Planets 
1 
12 
14 
19 
23 
31 
40 
xiv Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Naadi Essentials 
8. Friendship and Enmity of Planets 
9. Rashi Karakatwa 
10. Planets and Karakatwa 
11 . Pattern of Karakatwa 
12. Difference between Conventional Astrology and Navagraha Naadi 
Predictive Tools 
13. Rules of Navagraha Naadi 
14. Planets and Matters of Life " 
15. Yoga Phala from Combination of Planets in Chart 
16. Timing of Events by Transit of Planets 
Supporting Tools 
17. Naadi Gruha Vastu 
18. Four Planets Karakatwa Combinations 
Guiding tools 
19. Remedial Measures in Navagraha Naadi 
20. Naadi Muhurtha 
2nd Part 
Valuable Information on Astrology 
1. Tropical Chart Experiments 
2. Discussion on Conventional Astrology and Naadi Astrology 
Kerala Occu It Remedies 
Dating Back Astrology 
45 
58 
65 
74 
76 
85 
99 
110 
174 
201 
212 
263 
289 
299 
310 
334 
347 
Chapters grouped into different sections enabling to reader to select desired 
chapter of interest. 
Let all the planets bestow the reader with unending prosperity and ultimate bliss. 
Na aham karta sarvasya hari karta 
SAlYANARAYANA NAIK 
1st Part 
PRIMER 
• Fundamentals of General Astrology 
• Basics of Naadi System of Astrology 
ASTRO-METAPHYSICS 
• Core Logic behind Navagraha Naadi 
• Concept of Zodiac, Orbits ft the Logic of Time 
Karma and Planets in Navagraha Naadi 
0 
Rashi Chakra (Zodiac} and Karma 
• The Celestial Matrix 
Astrology is part and parcel of one's life. This fact is reflected in 
the order of weekdays, which are named after the seven planets. 
A child is born out of the seed deposited by father in the womb of 
mother. Hence, the first relationship of a child is father. Sun 
represents father in astrology. Therefore, the first day is Sunday. 
The next relationship is mother. Moon represents mother. 
Therefore, the second weekday is Monday. 
The third relationship is younger brother. Mars is karaka for 
younger brother. After Monday comes Tuesday. 
Likewise, the remaining relationships are uncle, priest, wife, and in-laws. They are 
represented respectively by Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn. Sunday, Monday and 
Tuesday are thus followed by Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and Saturday. 
The above relationships, which are represented by planets, are universally applicable. 
R RAMAKRISHNAN 
Chapter 1 
FUNDAMENTALS OF GENERAL ASTROLOGY 
ramavatara sooryasya, chandrasya yadunayakaha, 
nrushimho bhoomi putrasya buddah soma sutanycha, 
vamana vibhudhejyasya bharghavo bhargavasyacha, 
shane koormavtarashcha vaaraaha raahave tatha 
ketormeenavatarascha, lagnashcha kalkiroopa dhrukh, 
jeevanaam karma phalado graharoopi janardhanah: 
Q :Sir, if Lagna is Kalki roopa, then the effect of Lagna is to be considered only after kalki avatara. 
Is this a reason Naadi does not take Lagna in to account? 
A : Lagna is taken into account in Naadi but not for division of houses. This will be explained later. 
In the mean time we will discuss some of the fundamentals relating to the subject. All the "avataras" 
have the "amsha" of planets as explained in the Karakatwa of planets. The "kalki avatara" is said to 
be the Lagna in the horoscope which means the human beings of this era are the embodiment of kalki 
avatara. Persons with more "paramatma amsha" will evolve as super human, to merge progressively 
with the planets and with the universe ultimately. The lesser the "paramatma amsha" the human 
beings remain as ordinary mortals and suffer in the cycle of birth and death. The human aspect is 
therefore directly linked to planets and the planets represent the solar system. 
The solar system 
Planets 8: 
Earth 
going round 
SUN 
This is a simple view of our solar system where the planets are going round the Sun. 
Please note the belts of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury and the Earth (which will 
be referred to as apparent Sun's path). In Indian astrology the effect of planets are 
assessed on the earth and therefore, we consider the earth as central point and assume 
all other planets going round the earth. 
1 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
From Earth there are three planets Mars, Jupiter and Saturn in the outer circle and 
in the inner circle, there are three planets, Venus, Mercury, and Sun. Other three planets 
are Moon, Rahu, and Ketu. Rahu and Ketu are formed due to revolving of Moon around 
the earth. The figure below will give the clear idea about Rahu and Ketu. 
Moon revolving round the Earth. 
Moon revolves round the earth slightly inclined cutting the equator at northern and 
southern sectors. These two cutting points are energy zones considered by our sages as 
Rahu and Ketu which play very important role in astrology. In Indian astrology these nine 
planets as explained above are considered for prediction purposes. 
The Zodiac 
The solar system as shown above is encompassed with an elliptical circle which has 
relevance to the orbit of planets and this elliptical belt is called Zodiac and in Indian 
astrology it is known as Rashi charka or Kala charka. The figure below will make the 
explanation more clear. 
Zodiac belt in relation to planetary orbits. 
Scorpio Ubra 
Fundamentals of General Astrology 3 
This belt of 360 degrees is divided into 12 parts of 30 degrees each. Each part is called 
a sign named after symbolic visual formed by group of stars covering these divisions. 
Names of these divisions are Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, 
Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces and the Indian names are Mesha, Vrishabha, 
Mithuna, Karkataka, Simha, Kanya, Tufa, Vrishchika, Dhanush, Makara, Kumbha 
and Meena. Zodiac being elliptical and in order to find a commencing point, the fixed 
stars were considered. For this purpose 27 stars were identified and they were distributed 
into this zodiac beginning from Ashwini in Aries. The details of stars and their distribution 
in the Zodiac are given in the chart given below. 
Pisces-Meena Aries-Mesha Taurus-Vrishabha Gemini-Mithuna 
0 P.Bhadra -'3.20 0 Aswini -13.20 0 Krittika -10.00 0 Mrigasira -6.40 
3.2o 1 I I 3.20 \6.40 110.00\13.20 3.20 16.40 \10.001 3.2o l6.4o 1 I 
3.20 U.Bhadra -16.40 13.20 Bharani -26.40 10.00 Rohini -23.20 6.40 Arudra -20.00 
6.40 110.00\13.20\16.40 16.40\2o.ool23.20\26.40 13.20116.40\20.00\23.20 10.00\13.20116.40\20.00 
16.40 Revathi -30.00 26.40 Krittika -30.00 23.20 Mrigasira -30.00 20.00 P.Vasu -30.00 
20.00\23.20\26.40\30.00 30.00\ I I 26.40130.00\ I 23.20126.40\30.00\ 
Aquarius-Kumlbha Cancer-Karka 
0 Dhanishta -20.00 0 P.Vasu -'3.20 
3.2o l6.4o 1 I 3.2o 1 I I 
6.40 Shatabisa -20.00 3.20 Pushyami -16.40 
1o.ooi13.20I16.4ol2o.oo 6.40 l1o.ooi13.20I16.40 
20.00 P.Bhadra -30.00 
Star distribution 
16.40 Aslesha -30.00 
23.20j26.40j3o.ool 2o.ool23.20j26.40I3o.oo in 
Capricorn-Makara Zodiac Signs Leo-Simha 
0 U.Ashada -10.00 0 Makha -13.20 
3.2o j6.4o 11o.oo1 3.2o 1 6.4o 11 o. oo; 13.20 
10.00 Shravana -23.20 13.20 Pubba -26.40 
13.2oi16.40I2o.ooi23.20 16.40120.00123.20,26.40 
23.20 Dhanishta -30.00 26.40 Uttara -30.00 
26.4'130.0'1 l 30.00J l I 
Sagittarius-Dhanus Scorpio-Vrischika Libra-Tula Virgo-Kanya 
0 Moola -13.20 0 Visakha -'3.20 0 Chitta -6.40 . 0 Uttara -10.00 
3.2o l6.4o 110.oo113.2o 3.2o 1 I I 3.2o 1 6.4o 1 I 3.2o 1 6.4o 110.oo! 
13.20 P.Ashada -26.40 3.20 Anuradha -16.40 6.40 Swathi -20.00 10.00 Hasta -23.20 
16.40I2o.ooi23.20I26.40 6.40 [1 o.ool13.2oi16.40 1o.ooi13.20I16.40I2o.oo 13.20I16.40I20.00!23.20 
26.40 U.Ashada -30.00 16.40 Jyeshta -30.00 20.00 Visakha -30.00 23.20 Chitta -30.00 
3o.ool I I 2o.oo[23.20J26Aol3o.oo 23.20I26.40I3o.ool 26.40I3o.ooJ I 
4 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Each star is further divided into 4 quarters of 3 deg 20 minutes which are called padas 
and thus in each sign there will be nine padas as shown above. 
The zodiac signs are ruled by certain planets and they are based on the planetary orbits 
which are explained in subsequent chapters in Naadi. However, for the time being please 
note the Lordship of each sign as shown below: 
JUPITER MARS VENUS MERCURY 
SATURN Lordship of Signs MOON 
Rahu and Ketu 
Do not have 
SATURN lordships SUN 
JUPITER MARS VENUS MERCURY 
Except Sun and Moon who own Leo and Cancer respectively, remaining five planets own 
two signs each. Rahu and Ketu being shadow planets do not own any houses. Aries and 
Scorpio owned by Mars. Taurus and Libra owned by Venus. Mercury owns Gemini and Virgo. 
Jupiter owns Sagittarius and Pisces. Saturn owns Capricorn and Aquarius. This is to be 
remembered by the beginners. 
Ascendant and Houses: 
... '•t 
1. Sun takes 1 year to complete one cycle of Zodiac and therefore, he stays in a sign 
for one month. During that one month period every day when Sun rises the sign where 
he is posited will also rise at horizon. This rising sign is called Lagna for that time 
and remains for approximately two hours. Approximately, after 2 hours, the next sign 
appears at horizon as Lagna. In 24 hours, the 12 sings rise at the horizon as Lagna. 
2. Sun will enter approximately on the following dates in each sign and remain there for 
1 month. 
Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo 
SUN ENTRY Apr-14 May-14 Jun-14 Jul-16 Aug-16 Sep-16 
IN 
12 SIGNS Libra Scorpio Sagittarius Capricorn Aquarius Pisces 
Oct-17 Nov-16 Dec-15 Jan-14 Feb-13 Mar-14 
Fundamentals of General Astrology 
3. During the month from the entry into a sign till Sun goes to next sign, every day at 
sunrise the first rising sign where Sun is posited will be Lagna and in English it is known 
as Ascendant. For example today is 18th February 2008 and the Sun is in Aquarius. 
The sunrise today at Hyderabad is 6.42. Therefore, today at 6.42 the rising Ascendant 
is Aquarius. This will be there approximately two hours and the next Lagna at 8.42 
will be Pisces which will appear in the eastern horizon. (See also Chapter 4) 
4. This is only approximate position of Ascendant. The time span of signs are not equal 
and therefore, actual calculations may have little difference. The manual method of 
calculating Ascendant and other houses are available in many books and readers are 
requested to refer the same. 
In the example we have taken the Ascendant at the sunrise and therefore, we give below 
the other 11 houses counted from Ascendant: 
Pisces Aries Taurus Gemini 
2nd House 3rd House 4th House 5th House 
,. 
Aquarius Cancer 
Ascendant Ascendant 6th House 
is Aquarius 
and the remaining 
Capricorn 11 houses. Leo 
12th House 7th House 
Sagittarius Scorpio libra Virgo 
11th House 10th House 9th House 8th House 
The chart is ready for 18th February 2008 at 6.42 AM at Hyderabad, without planetary 
position. The Ascendant is Aquarius and all other 11 houses are marked here. Next is to 
fill in the planetary position for the above date and time. For this purpose we need to 
refer to an Ephemeris which gives daily planetary position for a specific time. The 
planetary position in Western Ephemerides is based on tropical Zodiac and the Indian 
astrology is based on sidereal Zodiac. Therefore, there will be difference in position of 
planets. Select only Ephemerides based on Lahari ayanamsha which are available in the 
market in any astrological book stall. In an Ephemeris the daily planetary position are given 
for either 5.30 am or 5.30 pm and some of them give at 12 noon. From this, note the 
planets for the given time and by rule-of-three derive the correct position for the required 
time. 
6 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
We give the example chart with planetary position for the above date and time mentioned. 
Example 1 
Gemini 
Pisces Aries Taurus 5th House 
2nd House 3rd House 4th House MAR 2.00 
MCXl25.50 
,... Aquarius 
Ascendent Cancer 
SUN 4.47 Chart for 6th House 
RAH 3.46 18th February 
at 6.42 am 
Capricorn for Hyderabad Leo 
12th House with Planets 7th House 
MERBJ 14.25 KET 3.46 
VEN 6.28 SAT® 11.42 
Sagittarius Scorpio Libra Virgo 11th House 10th House 9th House 8th House JUP 19.24 
The planetary position and the Ascendant computation can also be done by the help of 
"panchanga" (Almanac). The Ascendant and the house computations based on Sun. The 
planetary positions are taken either from an Ephemeris or a panchanga. This is one part 
of the computation. 
The 2"d part of the computation will be based on the Moon's position in a particular star 
on a given date and time for an epoch. This is for the purpose of computation of dasha 
and bhukti etc., which are planetary periods commencing from the birth time. These 
planets at different time will indicate the nature of results the native is going to get during 
their periods. This is called vimshottari dasha periods. A star as shown in the star chart 
is of 13 degrees 20 minutes span. This span is allotted with a certain number of years 
to each planet. A set of nine stars commencing from Aries to Cancer are counted and 
each of them are allotted a planet as lord. The same set of lordship is again repeated 
to other stars placed in signs from Leo to Scorpio and from Sagittarius to Pisces. We give 
below the 3 sets of stars for which a planet act as ruler and against it we have given the 
number of years allotted to them. 
Aswini Makha Moo Ia Ket 7 
Bharani Pubba P.Ashada Ven 20 
Krittika Uttar a U.Ashada Sun 6 
Rohini Hasta Sravana Moo 10 
Mrigasira Chitra Dhanishta Mar 7 
Ardra Swathi Satabisha Rah 18 
Punarvasu Visakha P.Bhadra Jup 16 
Pushyami Anuradha U.Bhadra Sat 19 
Aslesha Jyeshta Revathi Mer 17 
Fundamentals of General Astrology 7 
At the time of birth if Moon were to be in Krittika star, it is said that the person was 
bom while the dasha of Sm was in progress. The period of Sm will be for 6 years if the 
N1oon were to be in 26.40 degrees exactly in Aries. if he crosses that and if he were to 
be in 33.20 of Krittika then out of 13.20 full span of Krittika 6.40 has elapsed and the 
balance is only 6.40 which accounts for balance of 3 years. After completion of this balance 
dasha the next dasha of Moon commences and operates for 10 years followed by next 
planet Mars-7 years, Rahu-18 years, Jupiter-16 years, Saturn-19 years, Mercury-16 
years, Ketu-7 years and Venus-20 years respectively. The events have to be predicted 
in shorter span of periods and therefore, the dasha periods are further divided in to 
bhukti, anthra, sookshma and prana. The formula for the subdivisron is based on simple 
rule-of-three to arrive at these periods. There are ready made tables in many astrological 
books which will be useful in arriving at these fraction periods. This computation is for 
timing the event. Before timing an event, the quality and nature of such events are to 
be judged which is called phala bhaga. For this purpose the following informations are 
needed. 
1. Navamsha Chart, Arooda Lagna 
2. Chandra Lagna 
3. Sign significations, House significations 
4. Planetary significations & relationships 
5. Planetary aspects, Planetary dispositions 
1 . Navamsha Chart 
In the chart of star distribution each star is divided in four quarters and in each 
sign there will be nine quarters. Commencing from Aries, Aswini 1st quarter, 
represents Aries navamsha 2nd quarter Taurus navamsha and continues till the 1st 
quarter of Krittika in Aries which represents Sagittarius navamsha. The 2nd 
quarter of Krittika starts in Taurus sign which represents Capricorn and ends with 
Pisces navamsha in 4th quarter of Krittika in Taurus. Again the 1st quarter of the 
next star Rohini represents Aries navamsha. In the same pattern 108 amshas till 
Pisces sign is accounted for. Any planet or ascendent falling in a particular degree 
of a quarter of star will represent navamsha of the sign attributed to that quarter. 
Arooda L.agna 
Count the sign position of lagna lord from lagna and again from lagna lord count 
the same number of signs to arrive at arooda lagna. There are three exceptions 
to this rule 
1) If 7th sign becomes arooda, then take the 4th sign from it as arooda lagna. 
2) If the lagna itself becomes arooda then take the 4th sign from it as arooda. 
However if 4th sign becomes arooda retain 4th itself as arooda lagna. 
2. Chandra Lagna 
The sign in which Moon is posited becomes chandra lagna. 
3. Sign and House Significations 
Pisces-Meena Aries - Mesha Taurus-Vrishabha Gemini-Mithuna 
Ruler Jupiter Ruler Mars Ruler Venus Ruler Mercury 
Exaltation Venus Exaltation Sun Exaltation Moon/Rahu Exaltation Nil 
Debilitation . Mercury Debilitation Saturn Debilitation Ketu Debilitation Nil 
Gender Female Gender Male Gender Female Gender Male 
Quality Fruitful Quality Barren Quality Semi Fruit Quality Barren 
Element Water Element Fire Element Earth Element Air 
Constitution Dual Constitution Movable Constitution Fixed Constitution Dual 
Body Feet Body Head Body Face Body Shoulders/Neck 
Aquarius-Kumbha Brief - Significations of 12 Houses Cancer-Karka 
Ruler Saturn 1 Self, Health Longevity, Dignity, Name and Fame Ruler Moon 
Exaltation Nil Exaltation Jupiter 
Debilitation Nil 2 Family, Wealth, Speech Debilitation Mars 
Gender Male 3 Brother, Daring, Communiation, Writing Gender Female 
Quality Barren 4 Mother, Assets, Comforts, Leanring Quality Fruitful 
Element Air 5 Children, Speculation, Occult, Higher Learning Element Water 
Constitution Fixed Constitution Movable 
Body Legs 6 Disease, Debt and Enmity, Competition, Efforts Body Chest 
Capricorn-Makara 7 Wife, partner, Business, Society Leo -Simha 
Ruler Saturn 8 Difficulites, Dangers Death, Sudden, Legacy Ruler Sun 
Exaltation Mars 9 Father, Religion, Spiritual, Higher Knowledge, Exaltation Nil 
Debilitation Jupiter Journeys, Past deeds Debilitation Nil 
Gender Female 10 Profession, Status Gender Male 
Quality Semi Fruit 11 Elder Brother, Gains and Fulfilments Quality Barren 
Element Earth 12 Loss, Displacment, Negation, Assylums Self Element Fire 
Constitution Movable Constitution Fixed 
Body Knees denial. Body Spine/Belly 
Sagittarius - Dhanus Scorpio -Vrishchika Libra -Tula Virgo - Kanya 
Ruler Jupiter Ruler Mars Ruler Venus Ruler Mercury 
Exaltation Nil Exaltation Ketu Exaltation Saturn Exaltation Mercury 
Debilitation Nil Debilitation Moo/Rah Debilitation Sun Debilitation Venus 
Gender Male Gender Female Gender Male Gender Female 
Quality Semi Fruit Quality Fruitful Quality Semi Fruit Quality Barren 
Element Fire Element Water Element Air Element Earth 
Constitution Dual Constitution Fixed Constitution Movable Constitution Dual 
Body Hips/Thighs Body Pvt. Parts Body Lumbar Body Abdomen 
4. Planetary significations 
Sun 
Moon 
Mars 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
Venus 
Saturn 
Rahu 
Ketu 
Governing, Soul, Authority, Esteem, Healing, Father 
Emotions, State of Mind, Changes, Moving, Mother 
Energy, Aggressiveness, Machinery, Power, Injuries, Brother 
Intellect, Speech, Communications, Diplomacy, Sibling 
Bestowal, Law, Growth, Preacher 
Desires, Pleasures, Artistry, Beauty, Assets, Money, Wife 
Seriousness, Truthfulness, Slow, Work force, Elder Brother 
Secretive, Eccentric, Disturbing, Dangers, Foreign related, Paternal elders 
Quitting, Spirituality, Detachments, Outcasts, Maternal elders 
Fundamentals of General Astrology 
Planetary Relationships 
Planet Friends Enemy Neutral 
Sun Moon, Mars, Jupiter Saturn, Venus Mercury 
Moon Sun, Mercury Rahu all others 
Mars Sun, Moon, Jupiter Mercury Venus, Saturn 
Mercury Sun, Venus Moon Mars, Jupiter, Saturn 
Jupiter Moon, Mars, Sun Mercury Saturn 
Venus Mercury, Saturn Sun, Moon Mars, Jupiter 
Saturn Mercury, Venus Sun, Moon Jupiter 
These are used to assess the strength and qualitative modifications when the planets 
mutually get related either being in the sign of other planet, with the planets itself 
or by aspects. 
5. Planetary Aspects Planet Gen. Aspect Special Aspect 
SUN 7th Nil 
MOO 7th Nil 
MAR 7th 4th 8: 8th 
MER 7th 
JUP 7th 5th 8: 9th 
VEN 7th 
SAT 7th 3rd 8: 1 Qth 
RAH Sth 8: 9th 
KET Sth 8: 9th 
The general aspect will be effective only if there is a planet in ih to it. Special aspects 
will throw their influence on the respective places and the planets there in. 
Planetary Dispositions 
Disposition Type Effects 
Moola trikona or Exalted Splendorous Affluence 
Friends House Happy Status, Learning 
Own House Comfortable Progress, Prosperity 
Influenced by benefic Composed Help from near & dear, Confidence 
Combust Disturbed Enmity, Disputes, Pains 
Enemy House Uncomfortable Unrest 
Malefic influence Coward Loss of Kith & Kin 
Setting Failure Diseases, Troubles 
Debilitated Fear Loss, Theft, Difficulties 
8th & 12th for Sun, Mar, Sat, 3, 6, 7, 12 for Moo & Mer & 
Jrd, Sth places for Venus is said to be set places 
Leo for Sun, Taurus for Moo, Aries for Mar, Virgo for Mer, Sagittarius for Jup, 
Libra for Ven and Aquarius for Sat are Moola trikona signs. 
Houses 1,4,10,11,5,9 are good houses. Houses 2 fit 7 are good for material and 
relationship matters and bad as they are death inflicting houses. Houses 6,8, 12 are bad 
houses. 3'd house in general is a good house but it is judged on the basis of planets 
posited in it. For a moving sign ascendant the 11th house and its lord become baneful 
factors. For a fixed sign ascendant the gth house and its lord becomes a baneful factors 
and for dual sign ascendant the ih house and its lord becomes baneful. 3,6, 11 lords 
are termed as sinister. 6,8, 12 lords are malefic. The baneful lords, sinister lords and 
malefic lords will spoil the house in which they are posited and aspect. The houses 
owned, occupied and aspect, by a planet will also get spoiled by association with the 
baneful, sinister and malefic lords. The natural and house signification of planets will 
also get spoiled by such association. The sign lord where the baneful, sinister and malefic 
planets are posited will also behave like them and offer bad effects. Association means: 
1) Mutual exchange of sign lords. 2) Mutual aspect 3) Being in quadrant to each other 
4) Being in trine to each other 5) Being in close conjunction. Lords of 2 & 12 are neutral 
in nature and they normally support the other houses they own. Apart from this lord 
of 2 and 7 will carry death inflicting signification. Lords of 8 is most malefic and Lord 
of 12 wi II have de-linking factor. Natural benefic planets Jupiter, Venus, associated 
Mercury and Moon beyond 72 degrees from Sun when owns houses 4,7, 10 while the other 
house not being 1 ,5,9 they tend to become blemish. Such blemish lords when placed 
in 3,6,11 or associated with lords of 3,6,11 they lose their blemish nature. They may 
also lose their blemish nature in neutral houses but not in the association of neutral lords. 
Natural malefic Sun, Mars, Saturn, associated Mercury and Moon within 72 degrees from 
Sun, when owns 5th or 9th as the later house reckoned from ascendant tend to become 
blemish and their blemish nature will nullify with the influence of 3,6, 11 and neutral 
houses and lords as stated above. However a planet owning two houses out of 1, 5, 
Fundamentals of General Astrology 11 
9 and 4,7,10 is termed as yoga karaka. Lords of trika (6 or 8 or 12) if placed alone 
in any one of the other two-trika house is also gets status of yoga karaka. A planet 
owning 1, 5, and 9 while other house being 6,8, 12, 2, 3, and 11 not being a moola 
trikona sign is considered as good planet. A good planet, yogakarka planet, blemish lord 
turned good and natural benefic (functionally not attaining either blemish or malefic 
nature) will enhance the good effect of the houses they own aspect and occupy unless 
influenced by baneful, sinister and malefic planets. Mutual relationship as stated above, 
with respect to lords of trine and quadrant will also result in yogakarka status to planets. 
Natural benefic devoid of functional malefic nature will always enhance the good effect 
of the house and planet by its influence. 
Sun, Saturn, Mars, not being a functional benefic, Rahu and Ketu as natural malefic 
will render the house, its lord weak by their association resulting in bad effects of such 
influenced houses or planets. Irrespective of being a functional benefic two out of Sun, 
Saturn and Rahu, mostly de-link the matters of signification and particularly more 
effective in living matters of the significations. The affliction of more than one planet 
from the above group to any planet will render danger to the living matter signified 
by that planet. 
During the dasha and bhukti periods of planet, good results can be expected from the 
periods of yoga karaka, and good planets as assessed above provided the houses, lords 
and signification of planet as karaka are not afflicted. In such cases the right period 
of getting the good results would be during the transit of period lords in a good house 
along with its sign lord also being in good places in transit. Contrary to above, the bad 
results are experienced during the periods of baneful, sinister and malefic lords or their 
associates as cited above. 
The association of 8th house and 8th lord will spoil the yoga of any planet. Sinful, baneful 
and malefic lords except 8th lord will offer the results of the planet they are associated 
with while the associated planet will offer the results of the·sinful, baneful and malefic 
lords. A planet combust with Sun loses its all significations, while Sun will offer the results 
of the combust planet. Similarly the nodes also behave. Further the planets offering good 
results, should be strong and the planets designated to give bad results should not gain 
strength. This is judged from shadbala (6 fold strength). 
We have simply outlined some of the prime and applicable principles of delineations of 
conventional astrology. The subject is ocean by itself and needs lots of efforts to frame 
them into a common working tool. This is being taken up by us and with team effort 
we hope to come out with a classic work on conventional astrology. 
These are some of the essential fundamentals for general astrology. Knowledge of this 
is more than sufficient for going ahead with the study of Naadi astrology and there will 
be modifications for some of the fundamentals in Naadi system which will be explained 
in the subsequent Naadi chapters. 
Chapter 2 
BASICS OF NAADI SYSTEM OF ASTROLOGY 
Naadi astrology in general linked to thumb impression and readings from palm leaf. There 
are other systems of Naadi astrology, written by our great sages. Bhrigu Naadi and Nandi 
Naadies are two different Naadies and combining both Sri. R.G. Rao of Bangalore has 
evolved a system of prediction. He has published books in English and Kannada languages. 
Based on his works, "Prediction secrets -Naadi Astrology" is the first book written by the 
author as a guide to the works of Sri R.G. Rao. The 2nd book "Celestial Matrix in Naadi 
Astrology" explains key factors to make combination of planets. The present work is the 
collection of workshop experiments and includes many new principles of Naadi which were 
put to repeated tests by the students and the participants at the workshops which were 
being conducted regularly every week at Hyderabad. Many students have contributed their 
sincere efforts in this research work. These principles are based predominantly on nine 
planets and therefore, it is being referred to as "Navagraha- Naadi" in this work. 
However, the principles are based on the "Rae's system of Naadi Astrology". We give below 
some of the main principles of Navagraha-Naadi and in the subsequent chapter we will 
give detailed rules. 
1 Horoscope prepared for conventional system remains unaltered and used in Naadi 
system. No house divisions are required in Naadi system. The utility of Lagna will be 
in a different context in this system. 
2 Significations of twelve signs and nine planets are essential parameters to study Naadi 
astrology. 
3 Conventional rules of planetary aspects are replaced with "Sambandha"relationships 
links of planets from different places. 
4 Planets in trine establish close relationship similar to conjunction. A Planet in a sign 
will undergo modifications as per the planets posited in 2nd and 121h sign from it. The 
signification of a planet in 2nd sign indicates the nature of matter and the planet in 
12th sign will indicate whether it is supported or not. Similarly hemming to be studied 
with in the same sign. A planet in ]th to the planet under consideration will indicate 
the modification of the matter in question. A planet ahead will give its signification 
to the planet posited behind it. 
5 The art of prediction in Naadi system is to logically combine the karakatwa 
(signification) of planets and signs to a particular planet indicating the desired matter. 
6 Every matter in life is represented by a planet. 
7 The grouping of planets is done by directional chart which is explained at the 
appropriate place. 
Basics of Naadi System of Astrology 13 
8 A group of planets in a particular direction constitute a yoga (combination). 
9 Transit of major planets, Jupiter, Saturn, will indicate the fructification and nature 
of such yoga. Rahu and Ketu will indicate distress in yoga. 
10 The planetary dignities like exaltation, debilitation, retrograde, exchange of planets, 
dispositer theory, sign activation through lord, lord activation through sign and 
relevant relationships are all considered. Planets in friend's and enemy's sign are 
considered for their strength. 
11 The friendship and enmity among planets, slightly vary from conventional method and 
this is most important factor to arrive at correct predictions. 
12 The chart drawn at the time of consultation is important for analysis of any chart. 
These are the basic rules that are being followed in the Naadi system and the subsequent 
chapters will guide you through in-depth study of the subject. The next few chapters will 
give you the background on which the Naadi system is based. It is essential to understand 
the theory behind it to master the subject of Naadi astrology. 
Chapter 3 
Q: What actually makes the Navagraha Naadi to function- because there are many instances where 
-the correct predictions are given even with a horoscope wrongly cast? 
A: That is a wonderful question. If one understands the secret behind it, he will master the Naadi 
system. 
CORE LOGIC BEHIND NAVAGRAHA NAADI 
Before going in to the details, I would like the readers to go through some of the quotes 
from famous personalities. 
(Hendrik Antoon Lorentz) 
"I, cannot but regard the ether, which can be the seat of an electromagnetic field 
with its energy and its vibrations, as endowed with a certain degree of substantiality, 
however different it may be from all ordinary matter. 
Indeed one of the most important ofour fundamental assumptions must be that the 
ether not only occupies all space between molecules, atoms, or electrons, but that 
it pervades all these particles. We shall add the hypothesis that, though the particles 
may move, the ether always remains at rest." 
Note : Aakasha tatwa - all pervading Jeeva (Jupiter) represents this. 
(Albert Einstein) 
'~ human being is part of the whole called by us universe, a part limited in time 
and space. We experience ourselves, our thoughts and feelings as something 
separate from the rest. It is a kind of optical delusion of consciousness. This delusion 
is a kind of prison for us, restricting us to our personal desires and to affection for 
a few persons nearest to us. Our task must be to free ourselves from the prison by 
widening our circle of compassion to embrace all living creatures and the whole of 
nature in its beauty... The true value of a human being is determined primarily by 
the measure and the sense in which they have obtained liberation from the self. 
... We shall require a substantially new manner of thinking if humanity is to survive." 
Nic Herbert, a physicist who heads the C-Life Institute, suggests that "we have 
merely discovered an elemental oneness of the world. This oneness cannot be 
diminished by spatial separation. An invisible wholeness unites the objects that are 
given birth in the universe, and it is this wholeness that we have stumbled into 
through modern experimental methods. Herbert alludes to the words of the poet 
Charles Williams: "Separation without separateness, reality without rift." 
Core Logic Behind Navagraha Naadi 15 
It would be a mistake to suppose that these effects operate only with relevance to 
the invisible world of the atom. Professor Henry Stapp states that the real importance 
of these findings is that they translate directly to our microcosmic existence, implying 
that the oneness that is implicit in Bell's Theorem envelopes human beings and atoms 
alike. 
The interrelation of human consciousness and the observed world is obvious in Bell's 
Theorem. Human consciousness and the physical world cannot be regarded as 
distinct, separate entities. What we call physical reality, the external world, is 
shaped - to some extent - by human thought. The lesson is clear; we cannot separate 
our own existence from that of the world outside. We are intimately associated not 
only with the earth we inhabit, but with the farthest reaches of the cosmos. 
Certain quantum physicists now say that each part of the universe contains all the 
information present in the entire cosmos itself (similar to a giant oak tree producing 
an acorn that contains all the information to replicate itself)." 
What is in the macrocosm is in this microcosm. -Chandogya Upanishad 
As large as the universe outside, even so large is the universe within the lotus of 
the heart. Within it are heaven and earth, the Sun, the Moon, the Lightning, and 
all the Stars. -Adi Shankaracharya 
All the above quotes ultimately implies that the planets, stars, earth and every thing on 
this earth including human, animal, planets, minerals, trees, water, gas, etc., are all 
interconnected and represent the universe as a whole. 
"Yat bramhande tat pinde" means whatever constitutes this entire universe, i.e. the 
macrocosm, exists in the microcosm of the body. This leads to a mind blowing conclusion 
that this body is also the abode of celestial beings. The body includes anything and 
everything on the face of the earth. All that appear static in nature signify dynamic activity 
for a given time and those appearing as dynamic in nature establish the relationship to 
that activity. Awareness of space is apparent to the mind while the sense of time is absent. 
The sense of time gradually develops. The sense of space is connected to the movement 
of body while the time sense is connected to the movement of mind. The apparent space 
sense is subject to change, as the consciousness widens, it becomes independent of all 
materials and conceivable objects and merges into the infinity of space. This infinity 
cannot be conceived hence it is unexplainable but can be experienced. The universe with 
infinite forms of life, solar systems, dimensions of consciousness, metaphysical 
speculation, philosophy, or to that matter even psychology are origins of space evolution. 
The other dimension of consciousness is time. This at mundane level has a limited 
perception to the mind with our transitory existence. At the higher plane of perception, 
this dimension is ever existing dynamic links of universe without origin and destruction. 
16 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
This is an experience of reality at all levels with the ecstasies of the spirits. It is the rhythm 
of inner sound in tune with the cosmic rhythm of universal movements. It is a movement 
which is beyond calculations, binding and framing abstracts. This property of movement 
is the cause for creation of space without which the space can not exist by itself ( that 
absolute ). 
The interrelated space, time, planets, stars, earth, matter, energy, and everything 
above and beneath the sky are the projections from "that absolute" (the concept of 
time and space in the form of web is depicted on the title page of this book) 
From ever remaining whole "that absolute" emerges the jeeva (time factor) occupies 
the space (projected illusionary matter of forms). During its transitory existence, 
Jeeva generates vibrations either harmonic or disharmonic with "that absolute" by 
thought, speech, and actions expanding in space ("this"). The harmonic vibrations of 
"this" merge with "that absolute" which remains whole. 
"Om purnamadah purnamidam purnaat purnamudachyate, 
Purnasya purnamadaya purnamevaavashishyate" 
The disharmonic waves generated will be disintegrated by indivisible pure full ("that") 
to reemerge into the world in modified formats of body depending upon the degree of 
disintegration caused. 
Reemerged bodies will have recycling process with new experience, consciousness and 
environments with or without a chance of knowing the cause which is dependent on the 
modifications caused by the actions by thought word or deed known as Karma. 
"Good Karmas lead to incarnation into higher spheres and bad Karmas into lower. By 
virtue is obtained ascent to higher planes and by vice, descent to the lower. From 
emerged or reemerged life has bondage of past actions, what is called Karma. Wisdom 
results beatitude, and bondage from the reverse. So long as Karmas - whether good 
or bad - are not exhausted, men do not attain Moksha or the final emancipation even 
in hundreds of Kalpas. Both good and bad Karmas bind tight the Jeeva in their chains. 
One is a chain of gold and the other is that of iron. Moksha cannot be attained by 
man, so long as Knowledge of the Eternal is not attained." 
..... . Swami Shivananda 
From here begins the base for Naadi astrology with the effect of karma. The jeeva enters 
the cycle of birth and death, having certain degree of freewill to be selective either to 
de-chain from karma or to entangle in the bondage and adds up karma to be born again. 
Reversing the above quote "Yat bramhande tat pinde" to "Yat pindetat bramhande" 
we select the perceivable objects that are influencing the life on Earth in relation to 
bondage, material matters, debts of karma etc. The selected objects must have the 
astronomical symmetry. This intellectual effort has been done by our great seers who were 
great astronomers and are authorities themselves on the whole philosophy of universe. 
Core Logic Behind Navagraha Naadi 17 
They have designated a portion of universe which shall be within the reach of limited 
perceivable abilities of the human brain. This has become the solar system and they have 
identified nine bodies called "Nava Grahas" (nine planets). 
Sun being at the center point, all other planets including Earth revolving around the Sun. 
However, the effect was to be measured on the Earth and the Earth path was taken as 
Sun path and the 7 planets viewed as going round the Earth. In this solar system, the most 
distant planet is Saturn, next is Jupiter followed by Mars. The Earth is situated next to 
Mars and its path is taken as Sun path and therefore, the next planet in relation to Earth 
is Sun. Next to this there is Venus path and then the Mercury path. 
The Moon is the most nearest planet which is revolving around the earth. During its 
revolution the Moon cuts at two places. These two points are called Northern Node (Rahu) 
and Southern Node (Ketu). 
With this astronomical structure, the "Nava Grahas" were attributed with the measurable 
effects of the physical world. In relation to human being, the cause of cycle of birth the 
Karma component is allotted to planet Saturn. The Jeeva is attributed to Jupiter. The 
Ego is called Deha signified by planet Mars. The Atma or the inner self is attributed to 
planet Sun. The materialistic attributes were assigned to Venus. The planet Mercury 
represents intellect. The Moon which is closest to earth is representing Mind. The Two 
nodal points Rahu acts as Maya (Illusion) and Ketu represents Moksha (Salvation). 
Planets are moving bodies hence represent time factor and also create space by their 
movement. Time and space are inseparable constituents. If time is taken the space also 
to be taken into consideration. For this purpose the stars that are appearing fixed in 
nature have been considered. The 27 stars have a specific configuration which could be 
symbolically segregated with equal divisions elliptically around the universe. This belt is 
called as "Kala Chakra". Kala is time and Chakra is space. But the division should have 
a relationship with the moving bodies(planets). The orbit of planets were zoomed into 
this elliptical shape and the planets path were divided into signs commencing from Saturn, 
Jupiter, Mars from outer circle and the Venus and Mercury orbits in the inner circle were 
18 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
allotted two signs each. The Sun being a self luminary who makes other planets to reflect 
is given one sign and the Moon being a reflector of light from Sun is also given one sign 
(See figure in page 4). The elliptical divisions were reflected by these two luminaries one 
being from the Sun side other from Moon side. The 360 degrees of elliptical belt was thus 
divided into 30 degrees each. The 12 divisions were named in accordance with visual 
formats of the star group they cover. This division of "Kala Chakra" is now popularly 
known as "Rashi Chakra". Rashi means heap. It contain heap of stars and their 
information. The counting of divisions starts with Ashwini star located in the sign 
representing "Mesha". The 12 divisions were named as "Mesha, Vrishabha, Mithuna, 
Karkataka, Slrnha, Kanya, Tufa, Vrishchika, Dhanush, Makara, Kurnbha, and Meena." 
Each of these divisions has lordship of planets as per their orbits. Further these divisions 
were attributed with appropriate space significations like Chara, Sthira, Ubhaya, 
i.e.Moving, Fixed and Dual signs. Agni, Prithvi, Vayu, Jala meaning Fiery, Earthy, Airy, 
Watery Signs, Human, Animal. They have Time based significations like human body, 
emotions and materialistic matters. 
These are in relation to human being on the earth, but both planets and kala chakra 
represent the entire perceivable and non perceivable matters in the universe and 
establishes relationships with human. Therefore, there is no limit for attributing 
karakatwa (signification) to them. Taking the guiding factor of time and space, living 
and non living, pleasurable, paining, materialistic and metaphysical attributes are 
designated to planets and rashis. This excellent concept by our great seers is par 
excellence. By constant observation the great sages have recorded these significations. 
However the logic behind this can be understood through our religious scriptures like 
Puranas. This is the philosophy of Naadi Jyothisha. 
In this Philosophy the prime importance is given to Karakatwa (signification) of 
"Navagrahas (nine planets)" and therefore, it is justified to ascribe a sub title as 
"Navagraha Naadf'for this work. Theories contained in this book are all the results of 
experiments carried out with the participation of students and members in the class room 
and workshop sessions. With out their spirit, enthusiasm and selfless efforts this work 
would not have been possible. This work includes some of their contribution. 
I feel extremely blessed by the supreme lord having chosen me as an instrument to explicit 
some of the cosmic secretes for the benefit of society. 
E3l1cgM:d Gita, Ch.13,Verses 15 :"Without and within all beings the unmoving and also the 
moving; because of its subtlety, unknowable; and near and far away is That (God)". 
E3l1cgM:d Gita, Ch.13, Verre 16: "And undivided, yet He exists as if divided in beings; He 
is to be known as the supporter of beings; He devours and He generates." 
Na aham karta sarvasya hari karta 
Chapter4 
Q: Why the zodiac is called Kala chakra and what is the relation of time to zodiac? 
A: Our~ were great astronomers as they had the powers to view the entire universe and had the 
total knowledge of creation. Their prepositional calculus cannot be treated as myth or hypothesis. The 
following chapter will throw the light on their intellectual excellence. 
CONCEPTS OF ZODIAC, ORBITS AND TIME 
Different sequences of orbits are considered to arrive at certain time elements for 
astrological purposes. The Hora sequence is based on orbiting path of planets. Considering 
Earth as stationary at the center, its orbiting path is attributed to Sun. 
In the above figure, outer path belongs to Saturn. Next path belongs to Jupiter followed 
by Mars. The Earth's path becomes the apparent Sun's path. In the Inner circle, After 
Sun's path next belongs to Venus followed by Mercury. The Moon's path is around the 
Earth. This is the sequence of hora. The hora is the planetary hour on each week day 
which commences with the day lord at sunrise and rules for approximately 1 hour. 
Subsequent hours are ruled by other planets in the above sequence of paths and repeat 
the sequence till next day. For example on Saturday the first hora at the sunrise will 
be ruled by Saturn and subsequent hora will be ruled by Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, 
Mercury, and Moon. This completes 7 hours. From sth hour to 14th hour again the 
sequence commences from Saturn and ends with Moon. In 3'd round once again the 
sequence commencing from Saturn to Moon will be completed. In the 4th round it 
commences with Saturn and ends with Mars which completes 24 hours and the next hora 
of Sun will commence at sunrise on the next day i.e. Sunday. 
20 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Week days are based on alternate sequence 
Scorpio Libra 
From Sun and Earth alternatively the paths are considered for allotting the week days 
to planets. The paths remain unaltered except that the Sun is placed in centre and Earth 
in its own path. Sunday commences with the major planet of solar system Sun. In his 
apparent path Moon reflecting the Sun rays is rotating around the Earth and hence 
Monday is allotted to Moon. From Earth immediate next path in outer circle is Mars 
and Tuesday is allotted to it. In the inner circle from Sun first path is of Mercury 
representing Wednesday. From Earth after Mars next path in the outer circle is of 
Jupiter stands for Thursday. Jn the inner circle after Mercury, Sun is having Venus and 
its day is Friday. From Earth in the outer circle last path is of Saturn and Saturday 
is assigned to it. Some attribute weekday sequence to relationships represented by 
planets. (Please refer to the annexure in part II of the book) 
Vimshottari Dasha sequence 
Keeping the same concept of Sun and Moon as said in the above paragraph the Dasha 
sequence is arrived. 
The life giving planet Sun the Atma occupies the first in sequence. The Moon being 
Sun's reflector stands 2nd in order. The next planet in the outer orbit is Mars. 41h is Rahu 
an energy zone created by Moon at northern node pulls back from Mars orbit. After 
Rahu, In the outer circle next to Mars is Jupiter followed by Saturn. This completes 
the sequence in the outer circle. In the inner circle the first planet nearer to Sun is 
Concepts of Zodiac, Orbits and Time 21 
Mercury which stands in the order next to Saturn. Venus stands after Mercury but the 
Venus is having a reversal energy zone of Ketu which seizes the preference in order 
and allows Venus to stand next to it. This is Vimshottari dasha sequence. If every bit 
of astrological components is drawn from the astronomical structure, we are sure even 
the periods allotted to each planet in Vimshottari dasha must have similar basis. With 
this strong belief, experiments conducted by one of our team members had an initial 
break through and it is taking up final shape for presentation shortly. 
The readers are aware of the fact that the Year, Month, Thithi etc., are all based on 
Sun and Moon and therefore, we are not going into these details. 
The Lagna factor 
It takes approximately one year for the Earth to complete an orbit around the Sun. 
This we call it as apparent motion of Sun in 12 Zodiac signs. Thus, Sun takes one year 
to travel 12 signs and it stays approximately 1 month in a sign. Apart from orbiting 
round the Sun, Earth also spins on its axis, completes one rotation in 24 hours, and 
comes back to the same sign where Sun is posited. This we presume as daily motion 
of apparent Sun resulting in rising of Sun and its sign every day. This phenomenon 
continues for the whole of the month and repeats the process in the subsequent signs. 
During a given month the rising sign along with Sun is called Ascendant. This Ascendant 
remains approximately 2 hours. The next sign rises as Ascendant in the same place. 
In 24 hours all the 12 signs will rise at that point. The wisdom of our great Rishis in 
attributing the beautiful word "Lagna" can be rejoiced if we analytically observe their 
intellectual abilities of correlating the orbiting and spinning time factors. This correlation 
closely relates to karma theory of Naadi astrology. 
The karma theory is the base for Naadi astrology. Karma is represented by Saturn. Jeeva 
(self) is represented by Jupiter, Deha (Body) represented by Mars, (Manah) Mind is 
represented by Moon, Maya (illusion) represented by Rahu and Moksha (solvation) 
represented by Ketu. Atma (soul) represented by Sun. The Vasana (reminiscence) of 
Buddhi (intelligence) is represented by Mercury and the Vasana (reminiscence) of Bhoga 
(desires and pleasures) is represented by Venus. This is the macrocosm. Due to karma 
balance with the Vasana (reminiscence), the individual Jeeva is born. This is 
microcosm. 
The Sun stays in a sign for a period of one month. This is the first division of macrocosm. 
With the designed time and space component, every day by the spinning of earth a 
particular part of the Earth will have sunrise. This particular time of appearance of Sun 
will energise that part of horizon with the macrocosm. From this macrocosm, 
disintegration of microcosm takes place to become active on the earth at a particular 
place and time through the zodiac sign rising as Lagna at that given time. The-
disintegrated microcosm causes evolution in general and birth of life force be 
22 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
karma in particular. This glorified activity will be taking place in different places with 
different Zodiac signs depending upon the timing of Sunrise at those places. 
This celestial act completes by the end of 241h hour and the next day begins with fresh 
bombardment. Based on the place and time the first sign where Sun is stationed for 
a month due to its orbital motion will rise along with the Sun. This sign will represent 
the emergent microcosm be it life force or any other evolution. This also establishes 
the relationship with the Sun. Due to spinning, the next sign will appear at the horizon 
and the Sun establishing his relationship with the rising sign will move ahead with his 
sign. Every sign with a time factor will indicate the relationship with Sun and therefore, 
Lagna is apparently indicating the day's position of the Sun. The rising sign is the index 
of this apportioned microcosm which in terms of astrology it is the human birth. At 
that point of time this born human will establish the relationship with his elemental 
factors guided by karma, represented by other planets posited in different sings at that 
moment. There are number of conjoining factors which are represented by this rising 
sign and therefore, it is crowned as Lagna which cannot have a right translated word 
at least in English. 
Due to these powerful factors embedded with so many secrets cannot be ignored by 
Naadi astrology. But due to its abstract analytical methods in Naadi, Lagna is approached 
differently. In this Naadi astrology the timing of event is based on transit and therefore 
dasha systems are not considered. Utmost importance is given to Hora and Weekdays. 
ChapterS 
Q: If entire time sequence is based on the Zodiac which again linked to path of planets, truly it cannot 
be imagination. If this is a time factor there must be some link to human lives who are the 
representing factors of Planets. 
A: Absolutely-correct, the karma theory and planets are closely inter linked which is explained in this 
chapter. 
KARMA AND PLANETS IN NAVAGRAHA NAADI 
This is a most important chapter and I request the readers not to miss this chapter. The 
logic behind Naadi system is discussed here. Once a person understands the logic behind 
any subject it is easy to grasp the essence of it and master the same. 
All perceivable and non perceivable objects beneath the sky are identifiable through 
planets. There is nothing which cannot be attributed to planets. This means even human 
beings are part and parcel of nine planets. 
In this system of prediction, it is the art of identifying the planets not only in human, 
but also in anything and everything. The planets, which we talk about in the horoscope, 
are the representative factors of everything in universe. We are dealing with human 
factor in relation to Naadi astrology. Therefore, we need to know their significations 
in relation to human being. Whatever signification we attribute, it must have 
relationship with the order of planets in the solar system. We first give the essential 
factors of human, represented by significations of each planet and then co-relate the 
astronomical sequence of planets with metaphysical approach. 
'i?I:I:R{A (SUN) Atma - Governing factor. In the universe, it is the life-governing planet. 
Father governs the family, in the future Son also becomes father. Sun is bright and gives 
energy. All that is bright and that becomes cause for energy and sustaining life will be 
attributed to Sun, like Government, Brilliance, and Progress etc. 
CHANDRA (MOON) Manah - Mind-anything that reflects. Mind reflects emotions, 
feeling. Emotion is the embodiment of mother, affection and love. Moon has different 
phases changing regularly. Change is the quality of Moon. Moon appears in night and 
thefts will take place in night. From the word change, many things can be understood. 
ANGARAKA (MARS) Ahamkara-Deha - Body is referred to as Ego in Indian philosophy. 
The person is identified by his body and therefore, it causes ego. Ego will emote, anger 
which leads to enmity. Body is a cosmic mechanism. Mars represent Machinery. Body 
functions on electrical and magnetic charges. Mars represents these energies. The Body 
indicates the strength. Mars indicates the power. The Power generates heat and in 
24 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Body, the blood generates heat. Mars therefore, represents Blood. Blood indicates 
relationship. The blood relationship is indicated by Mars. Mars indicate the power, which 
is predominant in male. Therefore, it represents husband of a woman. 
BUDHA (MERCURY) Buddhi - Intelligence -In Indian philosophy Budha is the son of 
Chandra. The product of mind is intelligence. It is the quick moving planet being nearer 
to bright Sun it represents intelligence. Mars in the outer circle of Sun's apparent path 
signify blood relations and Mercury being next to Sun also represent younger siblings. 
Knowledge is liked by everybody and Mercury represents friendship. Because of its fast 
moment, it interacts with other planets number of times when compared to other 
planets. Therefore, it has the tendency of transacting which is called business. 
GURU (JUPITER) Jeevah - angirasah (Means Jupiter is Jeeva) is the mythological 
dictum. In mythology, the Guru is a guide to divine section. Therefore, Jupiter 
represents guiding factor. The life force guides the body. In the body Jupiter represents 
the life force. Because of guiding factor, it represents as preacher. Preacher must have 
wisdom. Jupiter therefore represents wisdom. The life on the earth must lead a noble 
life. Jupiter represents nobility. In life, a man always desires for good things and 
success. Jupiter represents these factors. 
SHUKRA (VENUS) Bogha - pleasures-daityachal}'a (a preacher to demons). Demons 
normally happy with enjoyments. Therefore, Venus represents enjoyments. Enjoyments 
include, wine, wealth and women. All these are represented by Venus. Art is also a 
form of enjoyment. Therefore, Venus represents art. Daityacharya had the 
mrithasanjeevni-vidya a highest knowledge to make the dead alive. Therefore, Venus 
represents higher knowledge and also life saviour. Woman also becomes wife. 
Therefore, wife is also represented by Venus. 
SHANI (SATURN) Karma - Karma is the ultimate reason for birth and present karma 
again decides the course of life. Every action has equal and opposite reaction. Saturn 
is the last planet counted from Sun to revolve round the Sun. If Sun is bright it is dark 
having unknown things in it. Saturn is a slowest moving planet. Therefore, delay and 
laziness are attributed to it. It is behind Jupiter and it represents elder brother. Karma 
in material world is known as profession. Therefore, Saturn represents profession. 
RAHU (Northern node): Maya - This is an energy zone created by Moon. A creation 
of Mind. Therefore, it is assigned with Illusions. Having no physical form, it has the 
capacity to eclipse other physical bodies. It is therefore assigned with dangers, 
diseases, it moves in opposite direction to other moving bodies. Therefore, it signifies 
unethical actions. Due to its unique qualities, it is attributed as foreign in nature. Its 
placement is an obstruction to Jupiter Jeeva to enter earth. Therefore, it is assigned 
with signification of death. 
Karma and Planets in Navagraha Naadi 25 
KETU (Southern node): Moksha - This is also an energy zone created by Moon the mind. 
Having similar reverse movement. However, due to its placement between Venus and 
Mercury. It blocks the Mercury effect and pulls the Venus effect. Both the affluence 
planets are obstructed therefore it is assigned with significations of metaphysical 
nature. Due to its quality of blocking and pulling, it is assigned with de-linking, 
disputing, binding qualities. 
Atma, Manah, Ahamkara-Deha, Buddhi, Jeeva, Bhoga, Karma, Maya and, Moksha 
represented by nine planets respectively by Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, 
Saturn, Rahu and Ketu relates to human being. 
Many of the significations of planets can also be identified in a particular environment 
with relative representing factors sensible or visible at the point of knowing details of any 
person. We are not, therefore, discussing about the astronomically defined planets but 
we are relating the cosmic embodiment of these physical bodies which are well understood 
by studying the sacred texts like Upanishads and Puranas. For example, In India, the 
influence of motherly affection is glorified and given the status of Godmother. The first 
word the child learns without a teacher is addressing the mother "Amma", "Maa". In 
pain and distress, the same words are addressed. The emotional factor is so much involved 
in these words. That is why the mother is identified with the Moon. Moon in Naadi 
astrology is attributed with capricious nature. This can be testified by the story of 
"Tarashashank" where the Moon is the disciple of Jupiter and elopes with the wife of 
Jupiter Tara and troubles Jupiter for a long time. Therefore, in Naadi Moon is attributed 
with karakatwa of thievish, adulterous and eloping nature. If the Moon is adopted as mind 
and Jupiter as jeeva karaka the mind causes trouble, if not controlled by the jeeva karaka 
and it may rob the (happiness - Venus) from jeeva karaka causing agony. Shukracharya 
was having the mritasanjeevni the herb that can bring back dead to life. Therefore , 
Venus if casts his influence over Jupiter (native's life) against Rahu (death) which will save 
the native from dangers. There are number of such stories which will give the hidden logic 
in deriving characteristics of planets. 
Moon is mind and the Mercury is his Son. Mind is Moon and the resultant factor of mind 
is the intellect. Intellect does not recognise Mind. But mind needs intelligence to exhort 
its activity. This indicates the difference why Moon does not have enmity with Mercury 
while Mercury will have. 
The entire subject is based on philosophy and metaphysical facts. This subject is beyond 
the perception of present day science oriented mind which has limitation in grasping the 
subtle secrets. We will take up the signification of planets and match them with the 
astronomical configuration of planetary paths. Before that we need to know few more 
linking factor with regard to planets, chakras in human body and their relationship to 
astrology. 
26 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Chakras and related Planets 
Mar- Deha 
Jup- Jeeva 
Ven- Bogha 
Sun- Atma 
Mer - Intellect 
Moon- Mind 
[ Saturn - Karma J 
There are 7 chakras in the human body, which is out of purview of medical sciences. These 
chakras are having planets assigned to them in a sequence which is related to breathing 
process. 
The Atma (Sun) is to be realised through Mind (Moon) by the Jeeva (Jupiter): This is the 
purpose of life with which karma is attached and to clear this "karma deha" is essential. 
If we de-link Atma, (Sun) Mind, (Moon) and Jeeva (Jupiter) from the above order, the 
remaining are Mars-Deha, Venus-Bhoga, Mercury-Buddhi and Saturn-Karma. They are 
in the same order in the "Kala Chakra" (Zodiac). In the sequence of signs Aries, Taurus 
and Gemini ends with the link of sign Cancer representing Moon. In reverse sequence 
from the signs Scorpio, Libra and Virgo ends with the link of sign Leo representing Sun. 
From Cancer the opposite sign Capricorn and its lord Saturn represents karma relating 
to material matters. From Leo the opposite sign Aquarius and its lord again Saturn 
represents karma relating to "Rinanubandha" (bondage of debts). The Moon 
represents emotional factors and the Sun signify governing factor. Being mind, the Moon 
prompts for materialistic desires indicated by its trine. The karma trine from Aquarius 
of Sun trine indicates the Rinanubandha karma (karma due to debts of bondage). 
Surprisingly, the Jeeva karaka (Jupiter) sign Sagittarius is approaching the sign Capricorn 
representing the karma trine of present birth. This establishes the free will of jeeva 
to perform present karma. On the other side, the sanchita, prarabdha karma trine 
Karma and Planets in Navagraha Naadi 27 
represented by Aquarius is approaching the other side of Jeeva sign, the Pisces indicating 
the inevitable karma to Jeeva. This establishes the ancient's dictum " Yat bramhande 
tat pinde" 
Karma is of three kinds, viz., Sanchita (accumulated deeds}, Praradba (fructifying 
deeds) and Kriyamana or Aagami (current deeds). Sanchitha is all the accumulated 
karmas of the past. Part of it is seen in the character of man, in his tendencies and 
aptitudes, capacities, inclinations and desires, etc. This in Naadi we study from the visible 
half circle of zodiac from Lagna and the planets posited there. If Saturn also posited in 
this visible half and connects other planets anywhere in the Zodiac, it indicates the 
"praradba karma" (portion of the past karma which is responsible for the present body). 
Saturn in the invisible half of zodiac and connecting to planets anywhere in zodiac indicates 
the "kriyamana or aagami" (current deeds) of the Jeeva. Karma is an unknown factor 
and it is known only to enlightened soul. In reverse if the karma is known, the soul becomes 
enlightened. In Kundalini yoga rising of unknown "Kundalini Shakti" leads to enlightenment. 
The "Kundalini Shakti" is in "Mooladhara Chakra." This unknown Shakti is karma and the 
process to know this is "Kundalini Yoga". Mooladhara Chakra represents karma and Saturn 
signifies karma. Saturn signifies Mooladhara Chakra. One process of rising "Kundalini 
Shakti" is through "Pranayama", the breathing process. The Jupiter is identified in the 
breathing process of human life. In a day, we breathe 21,600 times including inhalation 
and exhalation. That means the Jeeva karaka is traveling inwards 10,800 times and 
coming out 10,800 times. The jeevakaraka is on the constant job of cleansing the karma. 
But the process is automatic without awareness. If the same is regulated by awareness, 
it becomes yogic process. The breath is life and therefore it represents planet Jupiter. 
Unconsciously, Jupiter is travelling though different centres to reach "Mooladhara" to clear 
the karma. The purpose of life is to bring awareness in this process and complete the 
task of life by clearing the karma. Let us study as to how this system is functioning in 
relation to planets and positions in the human anatomy. 
1 In the process of inhalation, breath will reach first to "Anahatha Chakra" ruled 
by Sun. 
Sun is Atma and it also represents Father and Son. 
2 Breath reaches next to "Swadhishttana Chakra" - ruled by Moon. 
Moon represent Mind and Emotional Bandages 
Next, it stops at "Moolaadhara Chakra" the ruler is Saturn representing 
"sanchitha praradba karma." 
1st stage of contemplation on karma by Jeeva (The gap between inhalation Et 
exhalation) 
With the Atma (Sun) and Mind (Moon), inter-linking to karma (Saturn). At this stage 
Jeeva the Jupiter contemplates on clearing the "Rinaubandha karma" (bondage) 
28 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Vasana relating to Ahankara, Buddhi and Bhoga commences with exhalation of 
breath which commences from "Manipura Chakra" 
1 Mercury is the ruler of "Manipura Chakra" representing intelligence, younger 
siblings. 
In the next step, exhalation reaches the "Vishudha Chakra" 
2 Venus is the ruler representing pleasures, joy, wife, daughter etc. 
In the 3'd stage exhalation goes to "Sahasrara Chakra" 
3 Mars is the ruler representing ego and blood relationship 
In the 41h stage exhalation reaches to "Ajna Chakra" 
4 Exhalation completes at "Ajna Chakra" the place of Jupiter. 
Jupiter here contemplates on clearing the karma relating to Vasana and 
Rinaubandha. 
This completes one process of breathing. This is the 2"d stage of contemplation providing 
a gap to repeat the next round. 
In inhalation the breath reaches at two places and exhalation takes about 4 stages to clear 
the karmas. That is why in "pranayama" the ratio between inhalation and exhalation is 
2 : 4 and if this is done with full awareness the Jeeva will be able to clear the karma and 
reach the enlightenment. But in general, the rhythm is not maintained and it is not done 
with awareness. This is due to the effect of Rahu who represents the Maya (illusion) and 
distract the Jeeva influencing with materialistic matters. Due to this, instead of clearing 
karma it accumulates more due to actions and bondage. On the other hand Ketu helps 
Jeeva to cultivate the detachment towards materialism. To coin the effect of Rahu and 
Ketu we can say Rahu represents desires and Ketu represent rejections. 
This is exactly in tune with the planetary configuration at the macrocosm in celestial level 
and in the microcosm at human level. 
In Naadi astrology this concept is given prime importance to see the journey of Jeeva 
from previous birth with planet Saturn indicating karma. Through study of Jupiter, Saturn 
and other planets, the Rinanubandha and the Vasana of the present life is decided. The 
influence of Rahu, Ketu and other planets in relation to Jupiter fit Saturn will indicate 
whether the person is inclined towards salvation or accumulation of karma. Persons 
inclined towards salvation will have Ketu influence blocking the materialistic matters. Rahu 
effect will lead to accumulation of karma and make Jeeva to entangle in birth and death 
cycle. 
NOTE: Due to different schools of thought the planets ascribed to chakras is debatable. We have 
selected the scheme from the associate works of Dr. Marella Sri RamaKrishna disciple of "Pandit 
Shriram Sharma Acharya -founder of "All World Gayatri Parivar". Fortunately this scheme fits 
into, not only the planetary order but also matches with pranayama input and output ratio. Sequence 
mentioned here can be practically experienced. Other works where differ may have their own criteria. 
Karma and Planets in Navagraha Naadi 29 
The "pranayama" is one of the prerequisites in "Sandhyavandana" a ritual in Vedic 
culture. The entire yogasadhana is based on this pranayama. Pranayama is also 
popularised by Swami Ramdev ji Maharaj to promote health. We have number of such 
cases where through yoga and pranayama practice many diseases have been cured. 
In our Indian philosophy, we believe that the bad deeds done in the past will make us 
to suffer by way of diseases during this birth. If by pranayama and yoga, such diseases 
are being cured or at least controlled, it is evident that some of the karma of previous 
birth is cleared and therefore, there is some relief or cure from the diseases. This 
proves our above theory that the breathing is a process to clear the past karma. 
Only on breathing, there are thousands of books hitting the stands published across the 
world. There are wonderful writers from western countries who have taken up this 
magic innovation from our ancient sages and have established the benefits of 
Pranayama. There are several methods, which have been evolved to control many 
emotional imbalances. Breathing process is directly recommended by stress manage -
ment modules. Almost all the modern yoga gurus have in their yoga process, breathing 
as one of their prime steps. Even the most modern doctors are now advising breathing 
exercises for many ailments. We have a selective branch in predictive astrology based 
on breathing which is called "Swara Vignana". There ar2 experts in this field who will 
predict the events and even spell out the Moon sign and the star of a person. In Raja 
yoga the main component is breathing regulation, which leads to self realization. All 
these factors establish clearly, that breathing is directly related to life force (Jeeva) 
which is trying to proceed towards salvation clearing the past deeds. 
Considering the sequence of planets in the above process, in Navagraha naadi we ~f\3 
exploring the metaphysical links based on the position of planets in the solar system. 
6 
Saturn 
Karma 
Past 
Present 
Future 
CAUSE AND PURPOSE OF LIFE OF HUMAN DEPICTED BY 
CELESTIAL ORDER OF PLANETS. 
~ ,. ,. 4~1----. 
5 3 4 2 8 1 9 
Jupiter Mars Rahu Sun Venus 
Jeeva Ego Maya Atma Bogha 
the self Body Illusion 
7 
Mercury 
Budd hi 
..__~OU_T_E_R_C_IR_CL_E __ _..I ._I __ C~E_NT_RA_L_P-'-OI_N_T _ ____.II._____I_N_NE_R_C_IR_C_LE _ ____. 
The numbers above the planets are in astronomical placement order. Numerologists can experiment on this. 
The Saturn is the first planet from the outer circle. 2"d is Jupiter. 3rd is Mars. 4th is Moon 
rotating around the Earth & Moon creating two energy zones Rahu and Ketu. 5th is Sun 
6th is Venus, ih is Mercury. 
30 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
In the outer circle 
First group has Saturn the karma karaka, Next is Jupiter the Jeeva karaka and the third 
is Ego (Aham), the Deha karaka Mars. This is the order of planetary orbits in the outer 
circle from Earth. (By karma (Saturn), life (Jupiter) takes the shape of body (Mars)) 
The Center point Earth: having Moon 
The 2"d group has Moon circling around the Earth with its two nodes, Rahu and Ketu. 
This indicates that, the karma (Saturn) causing jeeva (Jupiter) with deha (Mars) gets the 
mind (Moon) with its dual ways of maya (illusions - Rahu), moksha (salvation - Ketu). 
In the inner circle 
We have Sun as atma, with two orbiting planets, i.e. Venus as bhoga and Mercury as buddhi 
(Luxuries and intellect). These are "vasana" (reminiscence) attached to atma (soul). 
Jupiter as Jeeva karaka with the force of karma (Saturn) gets the form of body (ego 
Mars) and then gets the mind (Moon), with two sided ability material (Rahu), metaphysical 
(Ketu) enters the inner circle to get the atma (Sun) released from the clutches of intellect 
(Mercury) and pleasures (Venus) and other related significations. The present karma and 
the ability of mind decide whether to clear the karma or to add up more for rebirth. 
Once the jeeva clears the karma and realises the atma, the perception crosses the 
boundaries and understands the unified field of time and space and loses its individualistic 
identity merging with unexplainable "that". 
But the whole game plan is operated on the basis of karma balance and the orientation 
of mind towards, either maya (illusion) or moksha (solvation). 
It is with the help of intellect Mercury and the power of atma, the jeeva can control the 
mind and direct it towards moksha marga (salvation) represented by Ketu or get swayed 
by maya (illusions) and fall in to the cycle of birth and death. With the help of the heavenly 
map at the time of birth these factors are explored. 
Once we grasp the background of birth, present condition of mind and the path of jeeva 
for the next course of life, with the linking factors of Naadi positions we can read out 
the karakatwa (significations) of planets which will give the sketch of whole life . 
The subject is metaphysical however, all the materialistic aspects can be clearly arrived 
to guide the consultant appropriately. 
The karma theory also applied to Zodiac sings. In the next Chapter the details are 
discussed. Both planets and signs put together the readings will make Naadi predictions 
a perfect science. 
Chapter 6 
RASHI CHAKRA {ZODIAC) AND KARMA 
Though the karakatwa of planets are prime importance in Navagraha naadi, the role of 
Rashi karakatwa will also play a vital role in modification of results. We have seen in the 
1st chapter that the zodiac is inter-linked with the orbits of planets. The zodiac signs 
are the creation of time and space concept and contain vital information to study the 
self efforts, the support of karma in the present birth and the duties towards the 
relationships called rinanubandha. 
There are certain signs in Zodiac identified with reference to bandages (rinanubandha.) 
In conventional astrology for all planets there is a moola-trikona sign. In Naadi, we have 
a convincing metaphysical logic as to how these moola-trikona signs were determined. 
For anything to begin with, we need some reference point. Atma is the root of human 
life in Indian philosophy. In solar system the Sun is central point representing atma. It is 
therefore, logically convincing to begin with Sun sign. The Moon is reflection of Atma with 
its independent nature to project things. In solar system it reflects Sun light and by its 
rotation and gravitation exerts influence on earth. Sun and Moon are two beginning points 
and we shall see the structure in zodiac commencing with these two planets. 
Sun Trine Signs 
Pisces 
JUP 
Sagittarius 
JUP 
Moola of Jeeva 
Dharma 
Guru 
Guide 
ATMA SAMBHANDA 
Moola of Deha 
Brother 
Power (Shakti) 
Aries 
MAR 
Scorpio 
MAR 
Taurus 
YEN 
Libra 
YEN 
The Wife 
exalted 
dealings 
Leo 
SUN 
Virgo 
MER 
The Siblings 
Intellect 
Moola of Atma 
Atma Sambhanda 
(relation) 
Father, Son 
recognition 
32 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
The starting point is Sun because it represents identifiable microcosm disintegrated from 
the macrocosm at the junction of "Lagna"{as explained in earlier chapter). Sun signify 
pitru (father) and putra (son) as living matters. Abhijnana (recognition), jaya (success) 
keerti (fame) are the non living matters represented by Sun. The Sun sign Leo being 
a space factor represent vasana (reminisces) relating to these matters. To get rid of 
vasana jeeva karaka is the supporting factor to atma. The sign Sagittarius representing 
jeeva is in trine to Leo (2nd, 3rd, 4th signs from Leo do not represent jeeva). 
Therefore, Sagittarius is the "moo/a jeeva trikona" to atma. Jeeva seeks identification 
and support of "deha" {body) in Aries being 5th to Sagittarius {2nd, 3rd, 4th sings from 
it do not represent body). Therefore, Aries becomes the "moo/a deha trikona" to 
jeeva. These three moola-trikona signs will represent "rinanubandha "(bondage of 
debt) with respect to "prarabdha karma" (portion that needs to be worked out in 
this birth). The vasana accrued from which the atma is to be released is in the opposite 
sign Aquarius. Pot is a symbolic representation of Aquarius indicating filled up karma. 
Aquarius being a sign of Saturn opposite to the atma sign Leo, represents "moola-
karma-trikona". This is the place of elder brother who has the status equal to father 
in the family to discharge the karma in taking care of younger siblings. Karma is a 
resultant factor of buddhi and bhoga. From Aquarius the 5th sign falls in Gemini 
indicating intelligence and younger siblings (2nd, 3rd, 4th signs from it do not represent 
buddhi). Bhoga is the resultant factor of buddhi which is in Libra a 5th sign to Gemini 
{2nd, 3rd, 4th sign from it do not represent bhoga). For "rinanubandha" Venus lord 
of Libra becomes wife sharing responsibility with husband. Due to this sharing 
responsibility Libra becomes "bhoga trikona of karma". The relatives in causative 
karma are represented by moola-trikona signs. Gemini which represents younger siblings 
does not share karma responsibility. Therefore, Gemini representing younger sibling does 
not have the status of moola-trikona. Subtle state of "sanchita karma" occupies the 
space factor in visible-half formed by lagna, while Sun-trine and its karma-trine 
represent "rinanubandha" and "prarabdha karma" respectively. 
The distinguished "rinanubandha" and "bhoga karma" are termed as Sun-trine and 
Sun-karma trine in this Naadi work. 
Atma the vital force incognito, forces its apparent expression through the perceivable 
ego transformed into body in Aries being its "deha moo/a trikona". It gets its exalted 
recognition in Aries. Saturn representing lord of "Sun-karma-trine" gets its visibility by 
producing "bhoga" through karma. Therefore, the exalted recognition of Saturn is in 
Libra the house of "bhoga-kama'~ Disliking this bhoga the atma here gets debilitated 
and it's opposite sign in Aries being away from bhoga, atma the Sun gets exalted. 
Saturn refuses to be under command of ego represented by Mars in Aries. Therefore, 
he gets debilitated in Aries. Except Sun and Saturn, no other planet either gets exalted 
or debilitated in the Sun-trine and Sun-karma-trine. Karma is a binding factor to liberate 
atma. This is the main factor, which makes Sun to dislike Saturn. On the other hand, 
Saturn does not have any objection to confer with the nonliving significations of Sun. 
Rashi Chakra (Zodiac) and Karma 33 
Note: In Hindu culture, eldest son performs the last rites. Next preference is for the native himself. 
If the Native is not having an elder brother then Native shares the responsibility with his immediate 
brother. Elder brother in ancient culture is given the status equal to father. The immediate brother 
considered as supporting member in family matters. Younger siblings do notget this importance. 
Therefore, in the sign Gemini representing younger siblings, no planet gets any essential dignity. 
The Sun-trine consist of 
Jeeva Trine of Sun 
Karma Trine of Sun 
Leo, Sagittarius and Aries 
Aquarius, Gemini and Libra 
The planets in jeeva-trine indicate the "rinanubandha" with the relationships represented 
by the planets, besides it also indicates the affluence or deficits supporting in this birth 
due to the blessings or cursing of these relationships. In karma sign, the planets indicate 
the representing factors of affluence or deficit due to past karma which is being offered 
in this present birth. 
The Trine of Moon Sign 
Jeeva 
Manah 
Karma 
Pisces 
JUP 
Capricorn 
SAT 
Sagittarius 
JUP 
MANAH SAMBHANDA 
Aries 
MAR 
Moo Exalt 
Lobha 
Accumulations 
\ 
Gemini 
MER 
Cance (Jeeva control 
MOO Mind) 
Leo 
SUN 
Raga, Kama 
Moha 
Virgo MADA 
MER Applied 
intelligence 
Pride Exalted 
~------~--------~--------L-------~ 
Dwesha 
Krodha 
Matsara 
In Sun-trine atma & jeeva are abstracts at conscious level and the static physical body 
emerged on this earth is represented by Mars in the same trine. The activation and 
perceptions are reflected through the mind represented by Moon who is revolving round 
the earth representing "karma-bhoomi". Functioning at subjective and objective 
dimensions, the mind may, either transform to "super conscious" state or regress in 
34 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
to illusions. Therefore, it is essential to know the effect of trines commencing from 
Cancer being the own sign of Moon and from its opposite sign Capricorn to study the 
effect of karma in its trines. 
Moon represents moha (deep emotion), raga (passion), and kama (desires) in its origin 
sign Cancer. Emotional attachment of Mother to child is universally known factor. 
Volumes of sacred texts, social texts and psychological texts express the effect of this 
attachment. The mind craves for this emotion and develops moha, raga and kama. The 
sign Cancer is therefore, indicates "anubandha" (connection) to emotional relationships 
(Mother etc). The "rina" towards "anubandha' will be traced through planets linked from 
Sun-trine. The other characteristics, raga and kama are also attributed to Cancer. The 
craving mind when encounters ego through reflected body in Scorpio turns into hatred, 
jealousy and anger. Debilitated with these effects the mind in its journey through the 
reflected jeeva-trine in Pisces, seeks salvation, serenity and stability. This is the 
auspicious opportunity for Venus to get exalted allowing the mind to experience the 
bhoga in balanced condition. The mind gets rightly directed if jeeva controls it. It 
happens when jeeva rules over mind's origin. Therefore jeeva, the Jupiter is exalted 
in Cancer in the original house of Moon. Mars the origin of ego which causes depression 
to mind gets debilitated in Cancer. So far, in these three signs, the mind does get any 
ecstasy of exaltation and therefore it seeks "manokarma' (action of free will) in 
Capricorn. The manokarma in turn directs towards bhoga in Taurus being its trine. For 
manokarma to get bhoga it is essential to apply the intelligence. The applied intelligence 
Uchha Buddhi (exalted intelligence) is in Virgo a trine from Taurus. In this manokarma 
trine in bogha sign Taurus the mind is exalted. Except this, it does not have any other 
relatives representing either in Scorpio, Pisces, Capricorn, and Taurus or in Virgo. 
Evidently, mind does not establish any relationships of rinanubandha except the 
bhavanubandha with Mother through Cancer. 
It is wonder to see that Moon getting debilitated in Scorpio in its own trine and here 
none of the planets gets exalted or debilitated. The beauty is Venus (bhoga) finding 
an opportunity for its exalted sate in the place where Moon seeks salvation. The Jupiter 
(jeeva), rules over the very origin place of mind in Cancer and he is jubilant in winning 
over mind and gets exalted. In the opposite sign Capricorn, the Mars (Deha) exalted 
is happy to welcome Moon for wilful action. This is the time for the intellect to support 
for fruitful karma from Virgo where Mercury is exalted. 
When Moon (Mind) is under distress and seeks salvation, the Jupiter Ueeva) and Venus 
(bhoga) are exalted. On the contrary, when the Moon (mind) is seeking bhoga (Taurus) 
through manokarma (Capricorn) the Mars (deha) and Mercury (buddhi) exalted. The 
bhavanubandha of Moon starts in the mother's womb, which practically relates to this 
birth. Other than, this none of the Moon-trine from Cancer or its karma-trine from 
Capricorn relates to anything of previous birth. 
Rashi Chakra (Zodiac) and Karma 35 
Therefore, the moon trine indicates the present environment of emotional bondage and 
free will to do karma in the present birth. 
Moon trines are: 
Jeeva trine of Moon - Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces 
Karma trine of Moon - Capricorn, Taurus and Virgo 
The effect of Sun and Moon trines in horoscope is to be studied with respect to debts 
due to relational bondage and karma in relation to past and present. The visible half 
and invisible half of lagna indicate the accumulated deeds and the environment under 
which the present karma is to be carried out. There is always relationship between 
present and past. In order to establish this linking factor in Naadi astrology the trine, 
opposition and hemmed up factors are based on the above theory which is detailed in 
subsequent chapter on Naadi rules. 
Scaling down from unified macrocosm to disintegrated microcosm, the logical space 
divisions defining cause and effect of bondage and karma, the time framed human 
elements symbolically representing planets in the zodiac, and the intellect in establishing 
symmetrical transition between these microcosm phenomena and macrocosm universe 
is the revelation par excellence from our great Rishis. It is beyond the reach of limited 
scientific perceptions. A few scientists experimenting with space and time have 
experienced this unified relationship. 
There is a complex combination of Jupiter (jeeva) Mars (deha) Moon (manah) Mercury 
(buddhi), Venus (bogha) in the Moon trine and Moon-karma trine. All these put together 
an individual identity is formed on the earth indicating the activities and their effect 
during this birth. Jupiter (jeeva) gets exalted in the house of Moon having control over 
the Mind. The Moon gets debilitated in its own trine Scorpio. To disturb the bliss of jeeva 
with the Bogha, Venus gets exalted in Pisces the sign of Jupiter. In the karma-trine of 
Moon in Capricorn, Jupiter (Jeeva) is debilitated. Here the Mars (deha) is exalted and 
activated by the exalted place of Moon in Taurus, a bogha sign and from the buddhi sign 
Virgo where Mercury is exalted. 
Note: The linking of planets from different places as prescribed in Naadi rules is based on the principle~ 
explained in the above paragraphs. 
We give below a few example horoscopes to study the effects of Sun 6t Moon trines with 
their karma trines. The examples are analysed on Naadi principles. Those not familiar 
with Naadi principles are requested to study the principles before going through these 
examples. 
36 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Example 2 
Effect of Sun trine and Moon trine 
Mar Ket(( 
(( 
(( 
Swami 
Vivekananda 
Mer 
Ven (( Asc 
Rah (( 
Sat(( 
Sun Jup Moo 
Swami Vivekananda was a great soul born on the soil of India. 
Sun the Atma, Mars the Deha and Jupiter the Jeeva are all in the Sun trine. Atma (Sun) 
in the house of Guru, the preceptor, itself indicate the "sankalpa" (divine wish) of his 
mentor Sri Ramakrishna Parama Hamsa causing the Jeeva and Deha to take birth. The 
Karma trine falls in the Moon section Capricorn, Taurus and Virgo, indicating the Karma 
to be done in this birth. Capricorn has Mercury (Knowledge), Venus (Advaita), Taurus has 
Ketu (Moksha), Virgo has Saturn (Karma) and Moon (Manah also travel). Advaita 
knowledge of Moksha Karma by travel. Venus and Mercury fall on one side of Rahu fit Ketu, 
Saturn and Moon fall on the other side of Rahu 6t Ketu. This indicates the Advaitajnana 
(knowledge of non-dualism) to go to foreign places. The purpose of Jeeva is driven by 
the "Atma sanchitha karma" of propagating Indian philosophy in the Western world. 
Rahu from Scorpio (Moon section) is approaching Jupiter in Libra (The Sun section). 
Ketu from Taurus (Moon section) is approaching Saturn in Virgo (Moon section). 
Therefore, the span of Jeeva in this birth is short. 
Rashi Chakra (Zodiac) and Karma 37 
Example 3 
Effect of Sun trine and Moon trine 
Rah (( Sat® Moo 
(( 
Ven (( 
Mother Teresa 
Sun 
(( Mar 
Ket (( 
(( Mer 
Asc Jup 
Sun trine has Saturn in Aries but by retro goes to Pisces a Moon trine signifying a place 
of divinity. 
Leo another Sun trine has Sun the Atma and Mars the Deha. No other planet is in the 
Karma trine Aquarius, Gemini or Libra. Saturn by Retro from Pisces, connects to Ketu 
and Venus in Moon trine. In Leo, Saturn (Karma) is with Mars Deha (Body) and the Sun 
is "Dhanwantritpod of health). This indicates the karma is supporting in serving physical 
bodies. By retro Saturn goes to Pisces a Moon trine connecting Venus and Ketu, indicating 
moksha karma to native (Venus as Jeeva karaka for female). This karma relates to Jupiter 
Jeeva karaka (Jupiter) which Saturn relates from Pisces by his retro motion. Rahu fit Moon 
connecting Mercury &Jupiter from Moon trine will signify: 
1) Rahu & Jupiter represent many Jeeva. Moon+Rahu+Mercury indicate skin related 
problems. 
2) To this combination, Venus along with Ketu and Saturn (moksha karma) approaching 
with the help of Sun (Dhanwantri) Mars the power to cure these afflicted Jeeva. 
The yeomen services of this noble soul to the leprosy patients is a universally known fact. 
38 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Example 4 
Effect of Sun trine and Moon trine 
Yen Sun (( Mar 
(( Mer® 
Ket (( 
Sri N. T. Rama Rao 
Rah 
(( 
Asc (( (( Jup Sat 
Moo 
The Sun trine has Venus, Rahu, Mars, Jupiter, Moon and Ketu. The affluence of Venus 
and Rahu, Mars and Jupiter, Moon and Ketu by previous Karma indicate: Venus Arts, Rahu 
and Mars indicate shadow body, Jupiter and Moon indicate the excellence in arts & 
expression and Ketu indicates divinity. Venus and Rahu indicate the materialistic affluence 
in abundance. Mercury by retro goes to Sun trine Aries, Indicating the eloquence in speech. 
Further, Sun is Ramavatara, Mercury is Vishnu-amsha, being in the Venus house by retro 
goes back to (Aries) Mars house indicating deha (body), where Venus is posited indicating 
beauty and arts in the house of deha, which is again linked by Rahu, indicating the 'chaya-
deha '{shadow-body). This excellent combination resulted in making the native as a great 
actor. This combination is linked by Jupiter and Moon from the sign of Venus indicating 
different characters of Mythology. In the Telugu film world there was none to beat him 
in performing mythological and historical characters especially in the roles as Sri Rama 
and Sri Krishna . Incidentally, his name is also Rama Rao which can easily be related to 
planetary combinations. 
But in this birth chart, the Moon trine has Sun, Mercury and Saturn where in Mercury by 
retro links to Sun trine. The self efforts in the political field were also supported by Mercury 
connecting Venus,Jupiter, Moon having Ketu and Mars. Due to the presence of Ketu, Moon 
and Mars, there were many ups and downs in his political career and he was given to "Moha 
bandana yoga "(bondage with a woman) due to Jupiter, Moon, Ketu and Mercury which 
culminated in 2nd marriage. The presence of Moon did not spare him from blemish links. 
Mercury and Ketu connecting Saturn indicate that the karma will end due to induction 
of Mercury (a female) in his life. 
Rashi Chakra (Zodiac) and Karma 39 
Example 5 
Effect of Sun trine and Moon trine 
Jup Asc (( Mar 
(( 
Sun 
Rah Mer (( 
Male 
Born - 08-07-1951 
Voluntary Retired Moo 
Bank Employee Yen 
(( Ket 
(( Sat (( 
In the Karma sign, Sun section has Rahu indicating the "apasavya karma" towards Mars 
(brotherly relationship) and Sun (Father fit Son) connected with Ketu, Venus and Moon 
indicating the loss of luxuries, emotional setbacks. Therefore, the native is deprived of 
enjoyments from luxuries as Jupiter is in the Moon trine connecting only Mercury and 
Saturn. In 1 ih to Saturn Moon, Venus, Ketu are situated. This indicates that in this birth, 
the native gets mental satisfaction only from gaining continuous knowledge detaching him 
from luxuries or affluence. The relatives of the native will enjoy the affluence earned 
by him through his profession. 
Saturn being in the sign of Mercury, given him the Karma of commercial nature. Jupiter 
links made him "Dharma" conscious. Whatever he earned is being enjoyed by his relations. 
He gets satisfaction by continuous learning of different subjects. With Mercury in the 
house of Moon and being approached by Ketu, Venus and Moon, he developed interest 
in metaphysical subjects and is still continuing his studies, in astrology, philosophy etc. 
After voluntary retirement, he bought a house to satisfy the needs of his family members. 
The presence of Venus, Moon fit Ketu being in the Sun trine denied him the enjoyment 
of these affluence. But the relatives represented by these planets are benefited. 
The effect of past deeds and the present birth positions will be clearly seen with the 
division of Zodiac in to Sun and Moon trines. This will help in deciding upon the remedial 
measures. Where Karma is predominant, the ordinary remedial measures by Gems, 
Yantra or Mantra will not be of any use. In the above example, the remedies to Ketu 
or Moon will not solve the problem of the native. It is the "Rina"(debt) that has to be 
cleared. This he can do by doing more service to the living matters connected with 
Venus, Moon, Ketu, Mars and Sun. The "Rashi Karakatwa" (sign signification) has many 
more modifications to be studied with the above division of Sun and Moon trine. 
Chapter 7 
CELESTIAL ORIENTATION OF PLANETS 
It is important to note which side the Moon is oriented. This can be seen in the chart 
by noting the degrees of Moon and the Nodes. If the Rahu is with moon or approaching 
Moon or in trine to Moon, then it is Rahu oriented. Instead of Rahu if Ketu is associated 
with Moon as said above then it is Ketu oriented. Similarly we can see this orientation 
to other planets, in Atma (Sun), Bogha (Venus), Buddhi (Mercury), Jeeva (Jupiter), Karma 
(Saturn) and Aham (Mars). This will indicate the orientations of groups which will be easy 
to assess the quantum of effect of each group towards which the life is destined. 
The purpose of Navagraha naadi is to read the status of Jeeva, the balance of Karma, 
the relational activities during this birth and enlighten the person about his journey 
towards the moksha-marga (Salvation). But in this fast growing world, every one is 
identified by his materialistic achievements. Therefore, all branches of occult sciences 
are commercially oriented. 
If we think and analyse seriously and sincerely, there is hardly any thing for an astrologer 
to predict for routine matters of life. With the quantum and quality predestined, 00'/o 
of human beings born will learn something, have some status, will work to earn, will have 
ambitions, will get married, will produce children, will have comforts, will get diseases, 
and ultimately 100% will die. The duty of the astrologer does not end by blowing his own 
trumpets by just predicting the condition of the consultant. If an event is to be predicted 
it is essential to know the cause, effect and its relation to previous karma. It is the duty 
of the astrologer to make the consultant to understand the reasons for such sufferings 
and suggest remedial measures. A person either has greater affluence by taking birth in 
a great family, or acquires greater affluence by his knowledge, which is influenced by the 
environment. He may or may not retain the inherited or acquired affluence or even miss 
an opportunity due to influence of his past karma. These are the main areas to be studied 
in a horoscope. Otherwise as astrologers, we will cater more confusion to the anguish 
of the consultant. 
In Navagraha naadi, the main focus is to identify the support to self-efforts and the 
destiny in relation to karma. We need to know the quantum of material and 
metaphysical orientation of life of the native. Proper remedial measures can be 
suggested by identifying the changes, damages, obstructions, diseases, incapability, and 
tensions due to past or previous karma. There are remedies for some adversities and 
some are inevitable. After careful scrutiny of the horoscope, an astrologer must be in 
a position to enhance the confidence with his guidance and equip the consultant with 
proper remedies. 
Celestial Orientation of Planets 41 
Navagraha naadi equips the astrologer with all the detailed procedures to analyse a 
horoscope and decide upon the remedies to overcome problems being faced by the 
native. 
In order to understand how a human being is destined towards his life, we should see the 
astronomical structure and the placements of planets. 
1 Saturn is the distant planet orbiting the Sun. This planet is Karma-karaka. The Karma 
is revolving around the Atma (the sun-soul). 
2 Next to Karma the orbit of Jupiter representing the Jeeva (the self) which is also 
revolving around the Atma. 
3 According to Karma, the Jeeva takes the shape of Deha (Body), which is represented 
by Mars, having its orbit next to Jupiter viewing from Saturn. · 
These 3 planets in the outer circle form as one group which represent the Karma -
Jeeva (Self) and Deha (Body) 
4 Jeeva with Karma and Deha has to enter the earth. The Earth is encircled by Moon. 
The Moon is Manah (mind). Moon creates two sensitive zones by cutting the earth's 
equator one towards northern side and the other towards southern side. The northern 
zone called Rahuwhich is towards the Jeeva trio (Karma, Self and Body). The southern 
zone is towards inner circle having Venus and Mercury (Bhoga and buddhi). 
These 3 components, Moon, Rahu and Ketu around the earth is another trio 
representing, Manah (Mind), Maya (Illusion) and Mukti (Salvation). The orientation 
of Jeeva based on one's Karma will get the Manah (mind) of Maya (illusion) or Mukti 
(Salvation) and then goes in search of Atma. 
5 Mercury never moves beyond 28 degrees from Sun and Venus never moves beyond 47.5 
degrees from Sun. Mercury is Buddhi(lntellect), Venus is Bogha (Pleasures). The Atma 
is surrounded by Buddhi and Bogha. These are Vasana surrounding Atma. For Atma 
the Bogha becomes bliss if exalted. This experience is far beyond the reach of Buddhi 
and therefore Buddhi ~ntellect) even if debilitated it does not matter. But when Atma 
is debilitated then it needs an exalted Buddhito recover and at this stage it may not 
care for Bogha and that is why there is possibility of Bogha (Pleasures) getting 
debilitated. Hence it is impossible for both Mercury and Venus getting either exalted 
or debilitated at the same time. 
Sun, Mercury and Venus which represents, Atma, Buddhi and Bogha are destiny 
makers in materialistic matters. Sun for name and fame, Mercury for intellect, 
friendship, commercial matters and Venus for pleasures. In metaphysical matters They 
denote knowledge of higher order, bliss and expertise to propagate in the society. 
Sun gets exalted in Aries the house of Mars representing Deha. This Deha is of Jupiter 
representing Pisces sign behind Aries and the purpose of this Jeeva and Deha is due 
to Karma represented by Aquarius the sign of Karma Karaka Saturn. 
42 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
The key factor in Naadi is nothing but inter-linking factors of these 3 groups. 
1 . Karma - Jeeva - Deha Saturn - Jupiter - Mars 
2. Manah - Maya - Mukti Moon - Rahu - Ketu 
3. Atma - Abhijnana - Buddhi - Bogha Sun - Mercury - Venus 
In English: 
Karma, Self and Body 
Mind, Illusions and Salvations 
Soul, Recognition, Intellect and Pleasures 
It is the connection of Jeeva to Atma, Abhijnana, Buddhi and Bogha in materialistic sense 
becomes destiny makers for which the Jeeva is linked. It will indicate the effects of past 
deed if Saturn is linked to these destiny makers to be enjoyed by native at appropriate 
time. If both Saturn and Jupiter are linked the Jeeva is supported by Karma also and 
therefore, it will be Dharma Karmadi Yoga. The Mars link will denote the efforts required 
to achieve the destiny. The Moon link indicates the changes. Rahu denotes illusions, 
unethical and dangers. Ketu will reject the materialistic matters. 
This metaphysical approach in Navagraha naadi is a unique approach to study the chart 
of a person. This will enable a person to know the journey of Jeeva, the karma behind 
it and the orientation of present life. For materialistic matters we group the planets: Sun, 
Mercury, Venus as Destiny Makers: Indicating, esteem, eminence for Sun, intellect 
for Mercury and affluence for Venus. 
Jupiter link to any one or more of above destiny makers, in the horoscope indicate native's 
free will to achieve the significations of the planets linked. The link of Saturn will indicate 
the fortune from the past relating to the significations of planets. It will indicate the best 
fortune if both Jupiter and Saturn are linked to the above planets which indicate the 
efforts and fortune supporting each other causing a very good yoga. This is Dharma 
Karmadi Yoga. Even to enjoy what is destined, there are several other factors which have 
disturbing or denial factors accumulated by previous actions or present conditions. These 
are indicated by the following planets which are designated as Destiny modifiers and 
breakers 
Egoistic nature of Mars - A destiny modifier who creates enmity and hardships. 
The Mental condition - represented by Moon changes, modifies or deprives of the effects 
for good or bad depending upon the other planets involved. 
Rahu indicates death, diseases, and dangers to living matters signified by all planets. 
It also blocks the good effects to be enjoyed by Jeeva (Jupiter) and Karma (Saturn) 
in the transit. Rahu indicates last-rites, hardships, unethical work, or relationships which 
may harm the life of native. Rahu is therefore, a destiny breal<er. There are certain 
Celestial Orientation of Planets 43 
material benefits indicated by Rahu but these will have negative effect on some other 
matters of life. 
Ketu is against any material matters. It is purely a planet of metaphysical nature. 
Therefore, it creates problems in material and relationship matters. Similar to Rahu, 
Ketu also indicates certain material benefits which will have effect on other matters 
in life. Due to opposing nature to material benefits, Ketu is another destiny breaker. 
Ultimately, Moon and Mars are destiny modifiers and Rahu and Ketu are destiny 
breakers. Now with the above principles we get the following grouping, which is 
necessary for the analysis of horoscopes. 
Jeeva Karaka is Jupiter 
Karma Karaka is Saturn for every Jeeva karaka, except when Saturn is considered as 
elder brother the Jupiter becomes karma karaka. 
Destiny makers are Sun, Mercury, Venus. 
Destiny modifier causing Changes, Loss and Blames = Moon 
Destiny modifier causing Haste, Ego, Enmity and Harassments = Mars 
Destiny breaker due to Illusions, Unethical, Dangers St Hardships = Rahu 
Destiny breaker due to Dejection, Dispute, De-Link & Obstruction = Ketu 
When the affluent planets encounter destiny modifiers or breakers, the matters are 
subjected to such modifications. However the destiny modifiers and breakers too have 
certain affluent factors which are to be considered in material matters. Moon represents 
distant travel, change, liquids and art related affluence. Mars represents authority, 
technical related matt_ers etc. Rahu represents secret deals and foreign related matters. 
Ketu deals with service oriented affluence. These affluence may have to be logically 
included for modified results. For instance, the combination of Sun & Moon, indicates 
change of place to father or one of the male progeny of the native will get helped by 
others to lead a successful life in other place or the native may find success in his life 
after a change in place or circumstances. If a third planet joins this combination, the 
nature of results will change depending upon the amicability or inimical nature of the new 
planet with the other two planets in combination. For example in the above combination 
of Sun fit Moon, if Mars joins after Moon, it indicates that one of the brothers of the native 
will stay far away. Father is egoistic and daring in nature. Father may have agricultural 
activities. He may have blood pressure. Mother would have faced problems in life and fire 
accidents. She may have misunderstanding with one of her sons. Native may face problems 
in learning and face hurdles in his life etc. Of-course these will have to be studied with 
reference to Rashi karakatwa also. 
44 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Jeeva karakas verses Destiny modifiers and breakers 
The characteristics of persons will change when destiny modifiers and breakers encounter 
the planets representing respective Jeeva karakas. Rahu indicates dangers and diseases. 
Ketu will make Jeeva karakas immobile and may cause physical problems. 
Karma Karaka Saturn verses Destiny modifiers and breakers 
The destiny modifiers and breakers will obstruct the karma in accordance with their 
karakatwa while with support of Jeeva karakas, they may compel the Saturn to perform 
such karmas represented by them. 
Sequential difference in combination 
In planetary combination, planets in the same sign need to be sequentially organised 
degree wise indicating order of planets and they need to be grouped according to 
directions. If a planet under study has an enemy planet next to it, the latter offers its 
negative characteristics to the planet under study and if it is a friendly planet it offers 
positive characteristics. For example: «.lp + Mer+ Moo, the Moon is a destiny modifier, 
but it is after Mercury. Native therefore is intelligent and educated due to positive effect 
of Mercury. He is related to greenery and water due to positive link of Moon to Mercury. 
Moon does not give its capricious nature to native being placed after a positive planet. 
But Moon has cheating effect on Mercury representing Land. Therefore, native will get 
cheated in land issue. Moon indicates change i.e. native will have change of place. Mercury 
signify "friend" being with Moon, a female friend, who is attached with blemish nature 
of Moon. Therefore, the native will be blamed due to a female friend. Moon is enemy 
to Venus representing his wife. This blemish links of Mercury fit Moon will have some effect 
between husband and wife causing unpleasant situation. Jupiter + Mercury + Moon 
combination at the personal level in relation to knowledge indicate, Jeeva, Buddhi, 
Rasayana and Kalaranga. Native will have knowledge and interest in, liquids and arts. 
NAADI ESSENTlALS 
• Friendship and enmity of planets 
• Rashi Karakatwa 
Planets and Karakatwa 
; 
Pattern of Karakatwa 
Difference between Conventional Astrology 
and Navagraha Naadi 
Chapter 8 
Q: In conventional astrology- the friendship and enmity of planets are decided based upon the Moo/a 
trikona signs. This they adopt even while prescribing gem stones. Is there a different logic in Naadi 
Astrology? 
A: Astrology is not a platform to decide the qualitative effect of planets. The significations of each 
planet which are ultimately linked to human qualities are to be judged. These wonderful logics have 
been given by our great sa::J9S in Puranas (mythological stories). These stories tell us about the 
qualitative effects of planets in human life. 
FRIENDSHIP AND ENMITY OF PLANETS 
Voluminous reading often prompts curiosity to jump to next chapter having identified 
words with nomadic memory. This tendency may cause in missing vital points in the 
present reading. Please study the contents carefully. We insist students of Naadi 
astrology to store the contents of this chapter in memory. We promise you that 
predictions will flow effortlessly from your mind and you will compliment us for this 
valuable advice. 
In fact, the terminology, friend, enemy, and neutral used in the astrological texts are 
not in its literal sense. None of the planets attains categorical dignities as either a friend 
or an enemy to each other. Based on the significations, relevance to a given context 
and the orientation desired, the effects become favourable either directly or with 
modification. Else, they turn unfavourable. In-depth, study of behavioural pattern is 
essential to assess opposing and similar pattern of significations attributed to planets 
in relation to human essentials. In earlier chapters, we have designated the planets as 
destiny modifiers, destiny breakers, and destiny makers. We shall discuss the relationship 
among these groups and among the planets in each group. Incredibly, we will come 
across contradicting behaviour in the generalised grouping. 
Destiny breakers Moon, Mars, Rahu, and Ketu with Destiny makers 
SU\1 AND MARS 
Sun is Father and Son to jeeva karaka the effect of Mars on these significations indicates 
the stubborn and fury nature of these relatives. It will not be easy for native to interact 
with them with these qualities. At metaphysical level Sun, represents atma and Mars, 
indicates shakti. This gives power and firmness to native to achieve success in that field. 
It is a desirable quality. The material matters of Sun like success, fame, and governing 
factors will have to overcome the obstructive nature of Mars. These affluence factors 
will have the technical qualities of Mars. Though there are undesirable factors, yet there 
is no serious enmity as such. Mars represents brother. The association of Sun makes 
his brother proud and influenced by governing factors. There is no enmity between 
them. 
SUN AND MOON 
The living matters indicated by Sun will undergo change of place or travel for progress 
and possibly get help from others. This is because Moon reflects Sun and it cannot have 
any enmity with it. On the other side Moon, represents Mother and other female 
relationship of native. Obviously, they get the pride of Sun in their nature, which is not 
an inimical aspect. Metaphysically there is a close relationship between atma and manah 
(mind). With Sun, Moon cannot influence its negative qualities. 
SUN AND RAHU 
Rahu being a kalapurusha is bound to trouble father or even cause life-endangering 
situations. This combination may also deprive the native of male progeny. If sanctioned, 
the male progeny may meet premature death or the survived one may turn out to be 
an antisocial element. Metaphysically, Sun being atma does not like to be shadowed. 
Instead of its vital dignities, other materialistic significations of Sun acquire unethical 
elements of Rahu. Paternal grandfather signified by Rahu can be attributed with the 
material dignities of Sun. However, this is of no use to the native. Therefore, Rahu 
is an outright destiny breaker in this combination. 
SUN AND KETU 
Metaphysically this is a prized combination. Despite initial hurdles, father of the native 
progresses in life inclined towards agriculture, rural inhabit, and spirituality. Sun 
represents governing nature and therefore one of the male progeny will be a subordinate 
yet recognised in his profession. Eventually the maternal grandparents, having had the 
dignified influence of Sun, were illustrious. Hardly there are any negative traits in this 
combination. Nevertheless, this combination will have telling effect on the health 
matters with respect to living matters signified by Sun. If assessed perceptively except 
metaphysical bolster with a sort of royal dignity the native hardly has any quantifiable 
material benefit. In this context, it is neither a destiny breaker nor an enemy but acts 
as destiny modifier. 
MERCURY AND MOON 
This union has direct effect on the native. Mercury indicates intelligence. Moon 
represents fraudulent tendencies. Alas, combinations of these two qualities are 
undesirable. Moon is quick and flowing nature and Mercury is intelligence. This run-
through-fast intelligence makes his learning effortless. It is a boon to the native. Moon 
signifies thought process, Mercury is intelligence, and together they give prudence to 
the native. Of course, this is a providential combination for an Astrologer. Moon is art 
Mercury represents friend of opposite sex. This is a Lovely combination. Eventually the 
dominant cheating factor in this combination prompts to tricking away deserting the 
friend. Awfully this is a combination of disgrace. Mercury is land (in Naadi Mercury is 
considered as bhoodevi and Mars represents matters produced from land (dharani 
Friendship and Enmity of Planets 47 
garbha sambhoota). Moon is cheating and loss. Moon also represents Mother. Landed 
property either by inheritance or by self-procured will be subjected to cheating. Totally, 
this is an unprofitable combination. Moon also represents daughter and Mercury a male 
friend. This calls for blemish record to daughter. Mercury is younger sibling and Moon 
is eloping or change. The younger siblings are prone to such activity. This is not a 
relishing combination. Metaphysically Mercury represents higher knowledge and Moon the 
thought process to give extraordinary knowledge in this field provided a strong planet 
relating to this matter controls this combination. Aptly Moon here acts as modifier, 
maker, and breaker. It is literally impossible to single out a particular behaviour for any 
planet. 
MERCURY AND MARS 
Mercury and Mars both have brother as one of their signification. Mercury represents 
land while Mars indicates enmity and quarrel. Often there will be rift between native 
and brothers for land causing enmity among them. There is always an obstruction in 
learning. Mercury indicates friend of either sex. Ditched by this friend, native earns 
enmity in this relationship. Our experience is that though there are obstructions in 
education, if the subject relates signification of Mars, the native will thrive in that 
education with lesser troubles. Mars as a breaker is fully functional in this combination 
except in the modified educational matter. 
MERCURY AND RAHU 
Rahu is not a metaphysical planet. There is no question of relating both these planets 
in this matter. Rahu is illusion and Mercury is intelligence. This accounts for marred 
intellect, which is not a desirable effect. Nonetheless, intelligence related to 
significations of Rahu will thrive. Rahu also indicates foreign countries and related 
matters. These aspects traced in the Mercury significations will predominantly focused 
if the native or his profession is involved along with changing factor of Moon. Rahu 
indicates Muslim religion. Native and/or the younger siblings and friends may have 
environmental influence or personal acquaintance linked to this religion. It all depends 
upon the circumstances and situations arising out of this inter-religion link that decides 
the good or bad effect. Rahu effect may also te II upon the health and secret matters 
of siblings and friends. True to its confusing nature, Rahu discharges its multiples 
dignities with Mercury. 
MERCURY AND KETU 
Mercury is buddhi (intelligence). Ketu is moksha {liberation). This can be interpreted 
in two ways. We can say Moksha Buddhi (liberated intelligence) or Buddhi Moksha 
{liberation from intelligence). Former relates to metaphysical subjects and the latter 
relates to material world. It does not mean lack of intelligence. Ketu being an 
obstructive planet for efforts, it creates hindrance in learning efforts. Such people can 
48 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
learn with lesser efforts. Ketu relates to chitra-gutpa (sketch or picture is called chitra 
and gupta is secret or accounting. chitra-gutpa personified is a sketcher of human life 
for lord of death yama). Ketu therefore signifies both writing and drawing. Mercury 
is intelligence. Therefore, the native may have skills in these aspects. This is a positive 
signification. Moksha also means relief. The native may resort to learning (Mercury) 
in the subjects relating to give relief to others. To grasp beyond five sensory organs 
is possible only through spiritual support. Spirituality signified by Ketu and Mercury is 
intelligence. Therefore, the native may develop sixth sense. Siblings represented by 
Mercury will be inclined towards spiritual life. There is also possibility of martial related 
displeasures to the siblings. There is no outright participation of Ketu to break, modify, 
or make destiny. 
VENUS AND MARS 
Mars is body and Venus is female body. In Naadi, these two planets attributed to wife 
and husband. This combination supports the unification of wife and husband. The fury 
and obstructive nature of Mars does its effect by giving temporary separation at times. 
In Naadi, this conjunction indicates the bondage of wife is from previous birth. On 
fulfilling the "rinanubandha' (debt of bondage) there could be separation. Venus being 
a watery planet flows in Money. Mars being fiery planet evaporates it. Native may 
become spendthrift. Venus represents wife, Mars stubbornness and anger. Wife will be 
short-tempered and at times stubborn. Mars indicates brother and for him marriage 
brings prosperity. Brother may also gain knowledge in art matters. Despite having, a 
loving wife at times, there could be separation due to other reasons. Brother may also 
hoard affluence. Mars, though a destiny modifier and troublemaker, still exerts positive 
matters in this combination. 
VENUS AND MOON 
Bhoga (Pleasures) is Venus and Moon, the mind is chanchala (unsteady). There is hardly 
any metaphysical propensity with this combination. Due to its unsteady nature, the 
native will always doubt others. When the native encounters a female, (Venus 
representing both women and Money), Moon will exhibit its adulterous, blemish fit loss 
tendencies. Venus and Moon being two female planets represent sisterly relationship 
between them. If Venus is wife, the Moon is her sister. At a given situation, she will 
extend comparatively higher pleasures in all respect to the native. (Native being 
adulterous and his wife's sister being pleasure loving). The wife of this native hails from 
distant place and there will be distress between husband wife and at times reaches to 
its peak. The female issues and the sisters of native represented by Moon and Venus 
may suffer ill health and distress in their lives. One of them may elope with an outsider. 
Mother represented by Moon with the enemy factor of Venus will indicate surpassed 
ordeal in the life of mother and the affluence part (Venus) wi II be lost (Moon) to others 
(because the lost part is also acting upon the native). For native these two combinations 
Friendship and Enmity of Planets 49 
cause diabetes, blood and other sexual related problems. Though Moon is a modifier, 
its role in this combination has equated with a breaker except for the illicit relation 
of native, which accounts for a partial pleasure. Socially this short-lived pleasure and 
long lasting loss is not a criterion to dignify Moon as destiny maker. 
VENUS AND RAHU 
In mythology, Venus represents shukracharya and Rahu represents daityamsha. 
Materially Venus is bhoga (pleasures) Rahu is maya (illusion). This combination will lead 
to accumulation of sin in this birth. Rahu is a planet that assumes the qualities of the 
planet conjunct with it and adds up its signification. Venus is affluence and Rahu 
indicates large, big and high values. There will be abundance affluence. Rahu indicates 
outsider and Venus affluence. There is a possibility of gaining wealth of an outsider. 
These abundance affluence factors are subject to involvement of other destiny makers 
and karma planet Saturn. The Jupiter link alone to Venus may not account for 
abundance. Rahu is kalapurusha but Venus itself indicates mritasanjeevini (life saving). 
Therefore, Rahu may not engulf Venus but it definitely causes troubles in health and 
fertility factors especially for a male progeny (Rahu and Venus both are enemies to Sun). 
Husband represented by Mars is a bitter enemy to Rahu and therefore, there is a 
possibility of de-linking between husband and wife. Rahu is shadow, secretive and 
unethical. Venus is art and affluence. Native may gain from shadow arts (cinema and 
media) and affluence transactions. Venus represents both daughter and sister. One of 
them will suffer with ill health or marital problems due to evil effects of past life and 
the other will lead a flourished and luxurious life. This combination in a female chart 
will indicate that her husband will not trust her. Venus and Rahu indicate luxurious 
vehicles. In our experience, we find the combination of Venus and Rahu has always 
troubled the female folks especially in health matters. Rahu dignify in all three groups 
as modifier, maker and breaker. 
VENUS AND KETU 
Spiritually speaking with Ketu, the Venus represents divine pleasures accredited with 
panditya (expertise). Venus is female and Ketu is spiritual. This defines a female deity 
protecting the native. Venus is dravya (Money) Ketu is mukti (liberations). Possibly 
native may gain mukti dravya (accumulated benefits of dead). This is not a conduce 
combination for accumulating wealth by native. However, it is possible for the wife to 
hoard money. Native gains reasonably well if he put his efforts in metaphysical fields. 
Ketu indicates the root and Venus indicates the fruit. This combination supports gains 
from agriculture. The root goes deep into earth and Venus is wealth indicating hidden 
treasure in the house (guptanidh1) with conditional conjunction in Mars signs. (Mars 
is dharani garbha sambhoota). With so many spiritual causatives, it hardly supports 
for a materially successful life. Naturally, this discords martial happiness. This 
combination will cause troubles in health and marital problems to other female relatives 
50 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
of native. In a female chart, it indicates troubled life before marriage and progress after 
marriage subject to other planetary influences. In this combination, Ketu not defined 
with any singled out dignity under the general classification. 
Jeeva Karaka Jupiter with Destiny breakers 
JUPilER AID MARS 
Jupiter is jeeva {life force- the breath) and Mars is shakti- hastam (power). Combined 
together it indicates sadhana (self-efforts) by which the native will gain extraordinary 
spiritual attainments. Native may get unbelievable divine revelations in dreams and some 
may come true. Native with this combination will be stubborn in nature. Regrettably, 
such natives fail in recognisable educational attainments. Nonetheless, in the field of 
learning they are "jack of all and master of none". The purpose of jeeva is to detach 
from materialistic world and Mars is burning factor. Fiery Mars burn Venus as money 
a disliking factor to jeeva the Jupiter. The native will be a spendthrift. Mars being an 
egoistic planet the native will think great of him and reacts to critics. In the false hope 
of achieving greatness, he goes out of the way to help many people but in return gets 
dishonour and blames. Others easily flatter him for their benefits. His own blood 
relations will frame him guilty. He often slips the opportunities due to his haste actions 
and repents later. He will face rifts in his profession. Despite having a good-looking wife 
due to misunderstanding they lead restless life. With so much of tensional life, the native 
is prone to blood pressure and related problems. Whatever said and done, this native 
is good at heart. Mars represents brother and he will be a noble person who will progress 
in life with self-efforts. In this complex conjunction Mars plays more negatively in 
material matters and conditionally (if self-efforts) positive in spiritual attainments. 
JUPITER AND MOON 
Moon being with jeeva karaka (Jupiter) will not offer his capnc1ous nature but turn 
him religious and spiritual. Moon is not happy with his restriction here and therefore 
offers displacement from birthplace. Whenever Jupiter in transit crosses, his own 
position in natal chart there will be change of place. Being a cold planet Moon will cause 
ill health to the native during infant stage and cold prone constitution at the later part. 
In our experience we also find that in spite of being spiritual, the native exhibits his 
unsteady nature quite often. Mother represented by Moon will be a religious and helping 
woman in the society. Native will also be interested in the activities signified by Moon 
like arts, food, travel and liquids. Moon with Jupiter is a prospective combination for 
a female progeny. Moon though a destiny breaker has not created any havoc in native's 
life. However, a weak Moon will predominantly offer his negative traits to the native 
making him untrustworthy. Therefore, Moon with Jupiter is a maker, modifier and a 
breaker too. 
Friendship and Enmity of Planets 51 
JUPITER AND RAHU 
Jupiter is jeeva and Rahu is kalapurusha (death inflicting). This combination generally 
indicates life endangering situation and even short life if there is no karma balance (in 
relation to Saturn and other planets). He might have faced endangering situations within 
a year after birth. Native may have to overcome the disease of dhanurvaata (Tetanus). 
Rahu is a de-linking factor and enemy to Mars. This makes native to be away from 
brother. He is bound to travel places. Naadi declares his birth as the reincarnation from 
one of the souls pertaining to grandparents. Our observation is that such natives are 
always prone to ill health in spite of having good personality and life will be full of 
experimentations and struggles. Rahu here is a ruthless destiny breaker. 
JUPITER AND KETU 
It is a jeeva (life) and moksha (salvation) combination. This will make the native 
yearning for metaphysical life. Birth of such natives will be nearby divine or pilgrim place 
and at times, it could be in a small house or hospital. Ketu is root and Jupiter is jeeva, 
they will be in the process of finding the root of life. They will have some sort of link 
to emancipated souls. They normally like to be secluded and will be deeply involved in 
thought process of their own. Obviously, they tend to reject mundane pleasures. Due 
to this, materially even if they are affluent they may not enjoy its benefits. They are 
in one way or the other involved in the service to humanity. Due to their peculiar thought 
process, they tend to be stubborn in certain matters. Due to association of Ketu, who 
is not amicable to Venus (wife), the native (Jupiter) may at times contemplate on 
keeping himself distant from wife. Ketu may give body pains, seizures, blocks, and 
growth in organs of the body (to be identified with other planets). Viewed spiritually 
and materially Ketu is both destiny maker and breaker. 
Karma karaka with Destiny breakers 
SAltm Af\D MARS 
Saturn is karma (work force) Mars is ego, haste, enmity. 
There is always noncooperation from ego and enemy factors of Mars towards profession 
represented by Saturn. However, there will be cooperation if the work-force is relates 
to significations of Mars yet hurdles will be there irrespective of nature of profession. 
At every stage of promotion at work place there will be backbiters conspiring to pull 
him down. This will at time cause aversion towards work. Saturn is karma and Mars 
is injuries. This combination indicates some physical injury due to karma. Mars 
represents brother and husband. These two living matter significations will face ordeal 
from enemies. Despite constant irritating factors, Mars does not totally act as a breaker. 
SATURN AND MOON 
Moon represents food and opposes the working force of Saturn. The Native is tending 
to enjoy food and rest. The blemish effects of Moon will often arise in the professional 
52 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
life. He may resort to travelling related job or his profession may call for frequent 
changes. Moon also represents art, travel and liquid etc, which makes the native to get 
involved in these professions. The disturbed professional life will also affect the family 
life creating restless situations. Professional unsteadiness may be seen due to fickleness 
of mind. The statement of Income and expenditure will carry forward nil balance due 
to the effect of Moon. He may also be prone to lung related cold problems Saturn 
represents elder brother. He would have changed many places in profession and faced 
blemish factors. He might be suffering from cold related problems. Mother might be 
working and she might face phlegm related problems. Though not alarming the 
situations Moon create here not palatable to the professional life of native. 
SATURN AND RAHU 
Saturn is karma and Rahu is maya, chaaya, videsha, apasavya, and gupta. Maya 
karma means illusionary work, which may fail. Chaaya karma means, work related with 
shadow and light indicating cinema or visual media work. Videsha karma is foreign 
related work. Apasavya karma means performing last rites or doing unethical work. 
Gupta karma means secretive work. In our case studies, we find that Rahu also 
represents repetitive nature. This causes repeating the same work. Rahu also indicates 
big, vast and increase. This will cause over load of work in the profession. Rahu also 
represents wheels and the work may relate to vehicle related or any wheels related work. 
Saturn indicates elder brother and connection of Rahu indicates life endangering 
situations or ill health to elder brother who stays away from native if survived. 
Conjunction of Saturn with Rahu makes Saturn fall in the axis of Rahu and Ketu. Under 
these circumstances without the link of other planets, the native will have very critical 
problems in life. 
Being a karma planet having sinful planet with him it accounts for past evil deeds and 
present sinful acts. Materially there are number of points, which are beneficial to native. 
Equally, there are modifying and breaking points. No clear-cut friendship or enmity is 
visible in this combination. 
SATURN AND KETU 
Karma (Saturn) mukti (Ketu) which itself indicate the end of karma. With this 
combination, there will be obstructive and disputable situations in any profession. Often 
there will be dejections, disinterest, and quitting tendencies. At every step, there are 
obstructions in progress. In the absence of other planet's support, the work 
~ 
significations of Ketu, which include, weaving, tailoring, painting or printing and any 
other low profile job will be helpful in pulling on the life. This combination is best suited 
for mukti karma that is spiritual related or human welfare related work like medicine, 
law, and welfare counselling. In these fields, the native will thrive. Saturn also represents 
elder brother who will be inclined towards spirituality. He will face problems in life and 
ill health. This combination also makes the native prone to disease that causes pains 
Friendship and Enmity of Planets 53 
and blocks. Ketu materially failed to support any progress in general profession. 
However, the professions related to Ketu are well supported. Ketu acts as both maker 
and breaker in this combination. 
Relationship among Destiny makers 
SUN AND MERCURY 
Spiritually Sun is atma and Mercury is buddhi. This combination inclines native to learn 
metaphysical subjects. Sun represents governing factors and the education signified by 
Mercury will tend to learn political or social sciences or get help from government. Sun 
is referred to, as dhanwantari (lord of medicine). Native may be interested in studying 
medicine. Mercury being an educational planet with Sun indicates success in education. 
Sun represents father and with Mercury, it explains the commercial and intellectual 
abilities of father. Native's Son also is similarly disposed. Mercury represents younger 
siblings. It indicates their respected life. There are no inimical factors involved in this 
combination. 
SUN AND VENUS 
Unless jeeva or karma relates to spirituality, there is no chance of metaphysical 
amicability between these two planets. Sun represents reputed or government and Venus 
represent affluence. Native may gain affluence from these resources. Semen is Venus 
and Sun is fire. Unification of these two elements will burn the semen rendering progeny 
problem to native. Combination of these two planets will also result in ovaries problem 
in females causing pregnancy problem. Due to this, there is a serious problem in having 
especially a male progeny. With remedial measures there is possibility of getting at least 
one male progeny. One of the female folks from native's house will lead a prosperous 
life in a respectable family. The wife of the native may have ornamental collections. 
Both the planets behave as breaker and maker to the native. 
MERCURY AND VENUS 
Spiritually, this planet leads to higher learning (panditya). Native will excel in the 
knowledge of sacred texts. Native will expertise in material learning also. These are 
the two major destiny makers. Persons having link of this conjunction to Saturn will 
never ever project as poor. Native will be inclined towards artistic learning. Native 
commands respect in society. Diplomatic in approach with sweet talks he befriends 
either sex for their benefits. Even the friends also help the native with requisite funds. 
Extra marital relationship not ruled out despite marrted to beautiful spouse. Disputable 
and blemish situations are inevitable in family life. Native will have self-earned 
affluence. The results remain same even for a female naive. One of the siblings of native 
will lead a luxurious life. Except the blemish and disputable family life, no other negative 
effects foreseen in this combination. 
54 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Relationship between Destiny makers fit Jeeva karaka 
VENUS Af'.D JUPITER 
Despite the consequences, Jupiter out rightly rejects affluence of Venus due to 
metaphysical reasons well explained in the earlier chapters. This makes native lesser • affluent. However, due to divine link of his radiant, spiritual, and helping n§ltured wife 
deficits are covered. On the other hand, native learns in many faculties including 
healing. He leads an effortless life though it may not account for a sizeable wealth. 
One of the sisters will be learned and fortunate. This also holds good to daughter and 
daughter in law. In material matter particularly money and assets matters this 
combination does not help. Being a destiny maker there is breaker quality in lesser 
degree in hoarding wealth. 
MERCURY AND JUPITER 
Metaphysically they are amicable as intellect is essential factor for jeeva. Naadi says 
that the intelligence brought forward from previous birth to present birth. His birthplace 
will be full of greenery. Native will gain knowledge in several fields. Native's sibling will 
be intelligent. Accidently native will meet a noble woman from a respectable background 
as a friend but the native will marry another woman. Similar situation will arise in a 
female native also but resulting in blames. She will be intelligent and liked in the society. 
One of her siblings being intelligent leads a respectable life in the society. Mercury is 
completely favourable except for a slight blemish tint towards female native. 
SUN AND JUPITER 
• 1 Naadi says that the native is the reincarnation of one of the ancestors and native will 
• have shades of traits of such ancestor. Native will of elite circle of friends. With special 
knowledge native will strive for prestige and leads life as noted person with respect. 
Metaphysically Sun is atma and Jupiter is jeeva. This is Jeevatmasamyoga. Atma drives 
actions. Sun as destiny makers justified completely. 
Relationship between Destiny makers and Karma karaka 
SAltRI AND Sli'J 
Atma in fact does not support any karma. Metaphysically both the planet oppose in this 
matter. 
In a professional life, the native will have to face harassments. Father also overcomes 
such situations. One of the brothers of father had support from the governing factors. 
Native may take up father's profession or some other profession related to significations 
of Sun. This combination creates disputes between father and son. In the initial stages, 
Native's son will be lazy roaming with bad company and in the later part of the life 
prospers in life. With an element of distaste, Sun acts as more a destiny maker. 
Friendship and Enmity of Planets 55 
SATURN AND MERCURY 
Spiritually this combination is good for buddhikarma. In material matters, Saturn 
signifies profession. It also indicates slow, delay and laziness. Due to this native consumes 
time in learning as well to express it. Native at times will be lazy in his activities. Native 
shows interest in sober profession and will prosper in transaction relating to land and 
business. Native will meet a friend of opposite sex with similar qualities. Our observation 
is that the native may take up commercial activities independently or with others. They 
also take teaching line. One of the siblings will be work minded and will have slow 
progress and problems in martial life. The native may develop relationship with other 
sex. at work place. iNative may also be interested in occult matters and may turn his 
interest into profession. However, except for the delay factor, this combination supports 
as destiny maker. 
SATURN AND VENUS 
There must be returns for work done. This combination ensures it. At given point of 
time native is sure to have affluence. Normally such natives prosper with affluence after 
marriage. His profession may relate to finance, assets, arts and luxuries. The female 
folks signified in the male chart or female chart will have some sort of earning. Female 
natives may have some dissatisfaction in life. They may at times become lazy. 
Ultimately, Venus is definitely a destiny maker with karma karaka. 
Relationship among Destiny breakers 
IVIOON Af\D RAHU 
The native with this combination will be weird in nature. There will be water zones near 
his dwelling place, Natives with this combination are prone to evil spell being always 
under illusions and fear complex. They are good subject for black magicians and they 
themselves are capable to learn such arts if other planets support. This combination may 
result in mental disorders if not surrounded by benefic planets. Around his birth time 
or within a year's time his mother must have had life endangering situations. In our 
experience, we find that such persons cannot differentiate between fantasies and 
realities due to illusions. They get great satisfaction in fantasising on impossible tasks. 
They are also secretive about their affairs of any nature. They are also adamant and 
always in urgency to push their words instead of listening to others. They have a 
powerful thought process sounding foreign to others. Rightly tuned, they will have 
blessings of maha-shakti(female power deity). This combination is also indicating travel 
to foreign countries to relatives signified by planets linked to it. Incidentally, Moon 
represents daughter and mother- in- law of the native. They will not be in good term 
with native or they will stay away from him. They will either be sick or face premature 
death. Lastly, it indicates about the migration of his grandfather to other than his 
birthplace. There are diverse results in this combination. Moon as mind to native utilises 
the effect of Rahu for its enjoyment while the living matters are negatively affected. 
This combination if singled out without the support of other planets is a destiny breaker. 
56 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
MOON AND KETU 
This combination leads the native towards spiritual thinking. Unless jeeva or karma 
joins, metaphysical life will remain at thinking level. Natives with this combination are 
stubborn in nature. Native will have to overcome specific hassle in life. Both native and 
his mother are prone to phlegm related problems. His mother or maternal grandmother, 
though deprived of recognisable education, will be spiritually oriented and known for 
their food distribution. This combination indicates that his birthplace has a temple of 
a famous female deity. We find that persons with this combination will be serious 
thinkers and get positive ideas. They also have opportunity of visiting foreign or pilgrim 
places if linked to karma or jeeva planets. Normally they tend to forego money lent 
to others. Except for metaphysical activities, this combination is not a destiny maker. 
MOON AND MARS 
Moon is mind and Mars is fury. This leads the native to get mental tensions. Native at 
times puts across idiotic behaviour. We observe such persons will not maintain a steady 
personality. Moon is mind and Mars is power. If they divert their concentration such 
persons may attain powers of mantra. One of the brothers may travel to many places. 
Mother of the native must have met with fire or such related accident. She is also 
stubborn and egoistic in nature. One of the female progeny will be stubborn in nature 
and will have stress in marital life. In a female horoscope, Mars represents husband. 
Husband will be capricious in nature and he might have shifted from his birthplace. He 
may resort to travelling related activities. In Naadi, planets Venus and Mars represent 
husband and wife. Other planets placed in between or associated with them will tell 
about their family life. Mars is having Moon with it and this makes Moon to come in 
between Venus and Mars. Venus and Moon do not go together. Husband being capricious 
in nature, based on gossips, he doubts his wife. This combination leads often disputes 
in family life. Except for conditional spiritual support, this combination is a destiny 
breaker. 
MARS AND RAHU 
This is the right description of "kujadosha". This combination creates misunderstanding 
in family life. The native is impulsive charged with unexpressed fury. Native is prone 
to accidents. One of his brothers might meet premature death or survive after 
immeasurable distress in life. On the contrary, the native may not have a brother. The 
native may diagnosed for blood impurities leading to serious problem of heart and other 
organs. In our analysis, Mars is body and Rahu is illusion. Such persons are not as they 
appear. This also indicates illusion in vitality. 
In a female horoscope, this indicates husband's recklessness, greediness, emotional 
attitude and his concern over petty maters. We also find such persons irrespective of 
their mental anguish lack in dashing nature. If Venus/Moon representing arts joins with 
these two planets, they tend towards performing arts like theatre or cinema. Of course, 
Friendship and Enmity of Planets 57 
the success level or professionalism depends on the involvement of other planets. With 
lesser possibility of favourable aspects, this combination is a breaker. 
MARS AND KETU 
Marriage is meeting of two bodies and then unification of mind turning those soul mates. 
The body signification of Mars is blocked-up by Ketu. The first requisite of marriage 
is weak. It causes difficulty in marriage prospects. Somehow, if pushed through marriage 
disputes are inevitable in marital life. Despite in a continued married life, wife and 
children dominate such natives. Native may also suffer from ill health due to nervous 
weakness. One of the brothers will lead a spiritual life and there are chances that he 
stays away from kith and kin under certain planetary configuration. No, not a good 
combination better call it a destiny breaker. 
Combination of Jeeva karaka and Karma karaka 
JUPITER Af\ll SATim 
Dharma karmadi yoga formed with this combination indicates that the native even if 
having lesser educational attainment professionally, will be in a good position having 
people working under them. There are also chances rising to the position of professor, 
doctor, judge or a religious institutional head. They have respect in the society. Being 
moderately spiritual, they are concerned about their family welfare. Keeping away from 
litigations, they diplomatically plan things to their benefit yet maintaining their social 
status. They extend cooperation even to affluent persons in the society lest they 
themselves are not that affluent. They are troubled with digestive problems. Female 
natives with this combination maintain their pride and prestige before and after 
marriage. They are capable of raising the status of family despite husband being 
helpless. 
In most of the above combinations, there is no clear-cut enmity or friendship factor. 
Besides the effects are again subject to change by their placement in signs. We need 
to consider essential and functional dignities of planets in each sign, which modifies the 
results of the desired combinations. Therefore, though the Naadi rules appear to be 
simple, it needs understanding of the subtle logic in the rules. Obviously, the grouping 
or the table of karakatwa given in this work are for easy reference but the logic to 
qualify the right signification comes from constant reading and practicing. 
Chapter 9 
RASH I KARAKATWA 
The Karakatwa of the 12 signs are given below. In order to get a flow of karakatwa they 
are given in English as well in simple Sanskrit words (in English script) enabling conversion 
to vernacular languages by readers. 
In the earlier chapter we have furnished the Sun, Moon and Karma trines. We give below 
Rashi Karakatwa (sign signification) in the same order. 
Space related 
Sun Sign - Jeeva Based Trine 
Dhanush - Sagittarius 
Forest (Aranya), House of Preacher (Guru Stana), Fire (Agni), Thighs (Jhangha), Place 
of penance (Suvarloka). 
Time related 
Dual nature (Ubhaya), Religious matters (Dharma),Warrior, Pious (Satwa), Real estate 
(Nirmaana) Ascending from material to spiritual plane, project, visibility, Weapon, 
Ammunition, Artillery, Hasten, Merits, Energetic, Aim 
Aries - Mesha 
Space related 
Brother/Husband's place (Sodara/Pati Stana) Hills, Mountains ( Giri_ Parvatha}, Forest 
{Aranya), Village (Grama) Fire (Agni), Head (Shira) 
Time related 
Righteousness, (Dharma), Moving (Chara), Ignorance (Tamas) Governing (Shasana), 
Action, Spirit of competition, Challenging, Power, Perverse, Friction 
Sim ha- Leo 
Space related 
Caves (Guha), Forest (Aranya), Government (Prabhutwa), House of Father and Son (Pita 
Putra Stana), Fire, (Agni}, Heart, Belly (Hridaya, Madhya udara) 
Time related 
Fixed (Sthira), Passion (Rajas), Righteousness (Dharma), Pride, Honour (Sanmana, 
Pratishta), Dominating spirit, Grandeur, Power, Pride, Capability, Enterprise, Celebrity, 
Honour, Dignity, Brilliance, Confidence. 
Rashi Karakatwa 
Space related 
Sun Sign - Karma Based Trine 
Kumbha - Aquarius 
59 
Secret house (Rahasya), Elder Brother (Jyestah) Research (Parishodhana), Impregnation 
(Sa-Satwa), Air (Vayu), Calf muscles (Meenakhanda) 
Time related 
Fixed (Sthira), Desires (Kama), Passion (Rajas), Concealed, Breathing, Bridge, Procure, 
Accomplish, Cover 
Gemini - Mithuna 
Space related 
Sibling house (Sodara/Sodari Nivasa), Garden (Udyana), Gambling (Dyutashala), Guest 
room (Atithigurha), Airy (Vayu), Desires (Kama), Dual (Dwiswabhava), Shoulders, Neck 
and Hands (Bhuja, Baahu) Pious (Satwa) 
Time related 
Communication (Sambhashana), Meeting (Samagama), Desires (Kama), Dual 
(Dwiswabhava), Grasp and deliver, Flexible, Intelligence, Reasoning, Presence of mind, 
Reciprocate, Contest, Unite, Cohabitation, Secret move. 
Tula - Libra 
Space related 
Trade fit Commerce Place (Vyapara, Vanijya Stana), House of Wife, Daughter and 
Daughter in law (Patni, Putri, Vadhu Stana), Air (Vayu), Moving (Chara), Kidney, Bladders 
(Mootra Pinda, Mootrashaya) 
Time related 
Desires (Kama), Ignorance (Tamoguna), Balanced ideas, Comparison, Equality, 
Adjudication, Coordination, Methodical 
Moon Sign - Jeeva based trine 
Meena - Pisces 
Space related 
Place of Pilgrimage (Punya Kshetra), Temples (Devalaya), Holy Rivers (Punya Teertha), 
Priest (Archaka), Preacher (Probhodhaka), Moksha Stana. Water (Jala), Feet (Pada) 
Dual (Ubhaya) 
Time related 
Pious (Satwa) Perish, Endowing, Elopement, Temptations, Salvations, Excitement, 
Rejoice, Perish 
60 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Karkataka - Cancer 
Space related 
House of Mother and Daughter (Matru, Putri Gruha), Cow shed (Gowshala), Agriculture 
(Vyavasaya), Lord's abode (Vaikuntah), Female place (Stree Stana), Watery places 
(Jalashala), Ocean, Rivers (Sagara, Nadi), Water element (Jaladhara tatwa) Moksha 
house, Breast and lungs (Stana, Swashakosha) 
Time related 
Passion (Raga), Greed (Moha), Desires (Kama) Travel and Change (Prayana, Parivarthana) 
Moving (Chara). Emotions, Mirror, Reflect, Surroundings, Disappear, Sarcastic, Criticism, 
Ridicule and Change. 
Vrishchika - Scorpio 
Space related 
Secret place (Gupta pradesha), A Hole (Randhra), Underground (Suranga), Snake hole 
(Valmika), Enmity (Shatrutwa), Uniformed force (Rakshaka Dala), Water element 
(Jala), Moksha house, Private Parts (Guptaanga) 
Time related 
Violence (Ugra), Passion (Rajas), Jealous (Matsara), Anger (Krodha) Fixed (Sthira), 
Mystic idea, Psychic, Harm, Venomous, Destruction, Resisting, Blemish, Interrupting. 
Space related 
Moo Sign - Karma based trine 
Makara - Capricorn 
House of Service (Seva Stana), Place of working (Karma Bhoomi), The House of 
proprietors (Yajamana), Earth (Prithvi), Knees (Jhanu) 
Time related 
Materialistic (Artha), Moving (Chara), Ignorance (Tamas), Laborious, Devotion, Set 
frame of mind, Service, Produce, Construct. 
Taurus - Vrishabha 
Space related 
Cowshed (Gowshala), Agriculture (Vyavasaya), Earthy (Prithvi), House of Female (Stree 
stana), Barren women. Face and Throat (Mukha, Kantah) 
Time related 
Passion (Rajas), Finance (Dhana), Crops (Dhanya), Luxuries (Bogha), Treasury (Kosha), 
Beauty (Sringara), Arts (Kalaranga), Materialistic (Artha), Fixed (Sthira), Virtuous 
labor, Pleasure loving, Sensual objects, Masterly behavior, Masculine traits of women. 
Rashi Karakatwa 61 
Kanya - Virgo 
Space related 
House of work and city (Karma Stana, Pattana), Bedroom (Shayyagruha), House of Lover 
(Prema Nivasa), Earth element (Prithvi tatwa), Waist, Digestive tract (Kati, Jeerna 
Kosha) 
Time related 
Materialistic (Artha), Pious (Satwa), Duality (Dwiswabhava), Trade and Commerce ft 
Accounting (Vyapara Vanijya Ganitha), Material matters, Concentration, Desire, 
Friendly, Agreeable, Amusements. 
Other General Rashi Karakatwa 
Mesh a 
Vrishabha 
Mithuna 
Karkataka 
Simha 
Kanya 
Tula 
Vrishchika 
Dhanush 
Makara 
Kumbha 
Meena 
Mesha 
Vrishabha 
Mithuna 
Karkataka 
Simha 
Kanya 
Tula 
Vrishchika 
Dhanush 
Makara 
Kumbha 
Meena 
Rashi and the deities 
Mesha 
Vrishabha 
Barren 
Semi-Fruitful 
Barren 
Fruitful 
Barren 
Barren 
Semi-Fruitful 
Fruitful 
Semi-Fruitful 
Semi-Fruitful 
Semi-Fruitful 
Fruitful 
Bestial 
Bestial 
Human 
Bestial 
Bestial 
Human 
Human 
Bestial 
Double Bodied 
Bestial 
Human 
Double Bodied 
Kartikeya 
Mahalakshmi 
(Half Animal and Half Human) 
62 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Mithuna Shiva 
Karkataka Parvathi 
Simha Brahma 
Kanya Saraswathi 
Tula Mahalakshmi 
Vrishchika Ganapathi 
Dhanush Ram a 
Makara Anjaneya 
Kumbha Sita 
Meena Adi Shakti 
Mesh a Bile (Pitta) 
Vrishabha Cold 
Mithuna Gas 
Karkataka Cold (Kafa) 
Simha Bile 
Kanya Gas 
Tula Cold 
Vrishchika Bile 
Dhanush Gas 
Makara Gas (Vaata) 
Kumbha Gas 
Meena Gas 
Mesha Rajasic 
Vrishabha Rajasic 
Mithuna Rajasic 
Karkataka Satwic 
Simha Satwic 
Kanya Tamasic 
Tula Rajasic 
Vrishchika Satwic 
Dhanush Satwic 
Makara Tamasic 
Kumbha Tamasic 
Meena Satwic 
Mesh a Red 
Vrishabha White 
Mithuna Green 
Karkataka Ivory 
Rashi Karakatwa 63 
Simha Golden 
Kanya Light green 
Tula Violet 
Vrishchika Brown 
Dhanush Yellow 
Makara Blue black 
Kumbha Blue 
Meena Ocean Blue 
Mesha Present 
Vrishabha Future 
Mithuna Past 
Karkataka Present 
Simha Future 
Kanya Past 
Tula Present 
Vrishchika Future 
Dhanush Past 
Makara Present 
Kumbha Future 
Meena Past 
Mesh a Dhathu (Mineral) 
Vrishabha Moola (Vegetable) 
Mithuna Jeeva (Animal) 
Karkataka Dhathu (Mineral) 
Simha Moola (Vegetable) 
Kanya Jeeva (Animal) 
Tula Dhathu (Mineral) 
Vrishchika Moola (Vegetable) 
Dhanush Jeeva (Animal) 
Makara Dhathu (Mineral) 
Kumbha Moola (Vegetable) 
Meena Jeeva (Animal) 
Mesh a Achievers 
Vrishabha Affluent persons 
Mithuna Intellectuals 
Karkataka Change makers, Movers 
Simha Rulers 
Kanya Traders 
64 
Tula 
Vrishchika 
Dhanush 
Makara 
Kumbha 
Meena 
Mesh a 
Vrishabha 
Mithuna 
Karkataka 
Simha 
Kanya 
Tula 
Vrishchika 
Dhanush 
Makara 
Kumbha 
Meena 
Mediators 
Disputers 
Activators 
Serving people 
Researchers 
Philanthropist 
Hasty, impulsi'v 
Slow in movem 
obedient 
Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Good speakers, witty and humorous, curious, 
fond of knowledge, fun seeking 
Emotional, and sensitive 
Dignified, authoritative 
Diplomatic, calculative 
Judicious in dealings 
Secretive, coward 
Honest, active, levelheaded 
Organiser, cautious, pragmatic 
Studious, philosopher, honest, benevolent 
Intuitive, healer, benefactor. 
With these Rashi Karakatwa, the planet will undergo modifications and these are to be 
studied for every planet in combination. 
Chapter 10 
PLANETS AND KARAKATWA 
We shall give the karakatwa in a language close to Sanskrit (in English script) which is 
very easy for those who want to translate them into their vernacular language followed 
by significations in English. The table of karaktwa is arranged in the celestial order of 
planets as explained in earlier. 
Table of Destiny makers: 
The affluence planets Sun - Mercury - Venus are Destiny makers. 
Affluent significations of these Destiny makers are enjoyed either by self efforts of 
Jeeva (Jupiter) or due to past deeds (Saturn). Therefore, in between Jeeva and Karma 
the Destiny makers Sun - Mercury - Venus are placed. 
Table of Destiny modifiers and breakers: 
Mars being a modifier is placed first. Moon being signification of Mind and his orientation 
is controlled by Rahu or Ketu. Therefore in the table, Moon is placed between Rahu 
and Ketu. 
Karakatwa (Signification) is grouped in the order of: Elements, Gender, Living matters, 
Character, Acquirable, Comforts, Diseases and Vaastu. The words used in the 
signification of planets will convey multiple meanings to select the desired matter. 
There are number of other significations which may be essential for reading at the time 
of consultations. Some of the signification not covered by table of significations are given 
at the end of tables. It is impossible to give all the signification of planets as everything 
beneath the sky and above are all covered by planets. 
66 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
PHALADAATA GRAHA 
GRAHA JEEVA PADAVJ.GAURAVA BUDDHI BOGHA"VIVAHA KARMA 
TATWA GURU RAVI BUDHA SHUKRA SHAN I 
UNGA Aakashatatwa Tejotatwa Prithvitatwa Jalatatwa Vayutatwa 
Purusha Purusha Stree Purusha Stree Purusha 
Jeevakaraka Alma Deha Buddhi Deha Bogha Deha Karma Deha 
11:'1:'\i A Guru Pitru/Putra Varga Sodara, Sodari Patni Jyestah, 
JEEVA Bhodhaka Adhikaravarga Mitra, Sakhi Vadhu Yajamana, 
Archakavarga Putrika Saha Udyogi 
Gaurava Pratishta Buddhishali Bhogabhilashi Aalasya 
Hithaishi Abhimani Chatura Kalatmaka Jada, Manda, 
GUNA Sukhadaata Gaurava Nipuna Kaami Nishtah 
Shubachintaka Tejasvi Grahi Sukhabilashi 
Mananeeya Mitratwa Moha 
Sahakari 
Dharma Samajika Vidya, Gnana Panditya Sanchitha 
Nyaya Samskriti Sastra Sasya, Ganitha Dhana Kanaka Prarabda 
Gnana Shasana Bhoomi Gruha Agami 
Shuba Vaidya Vyapaara Vahana Karma 
YOGA Sukha Dhanwantri Vanijya Sampatti Shrama 
Yashas Vyavahara Bogha Manda 
San mana Sammilana Sringara Aalasya 
Keerti Kalaranga 
Prakash a 
Probhodhaka Rajyaanga Ganitha Panditya Karma 
Arch aka Pratishtatmaka Patahshala Dhana Aalasya 
Dharmika Poshana Bodhaka Kanak a Shrama 
BOGHA Devalaya Vaidya Vaanijya Gruha 
Nyayalaya Samajasambanda Vyapara Vahana 
Prakashana Bhoomi Sam patti 
Pitraarjita Bogha 
Sringara 
Kalaranga 
Vaata-Jhangha Pitta-Netra- Vaata/p itt a Meha-Kafa Kafa-Vaata 
Kaamala Hridroga- Charma Veerya Swashakosha 
ROOA Stool a Jwara-Ushna Kantah Yoni Jeernakosha 
Yakruth-Pada Bhuja Ling a Sandi 
Naasarandra La lata Garbha Dam ani 
Eeshanya Poorva Uttara Agneya Pashchima 
Pooja Gruha Vata)'aJ]_am Kuberastana Paakashala Bojanashala 
VASTU Pooja Samagri Gavaksha(kitaki) Vidyastana Shayyagruha Vinashagruha 
Vigraha Prakashastala Athithistala Sringara Samagri Dhooli-
Patam sambandhita 
Planets and Karakatwa 67 
VIRUDDHA PHALA GRAHA -
YIYAHA·AHAM·MURKHA MAYALAJALA MANAH PKRUTHI BANDHA-MOKSHA 
Graha KUJA RAHU CHANDRA KETU 
Tatwa Agnitatwa Agni !Vayu Tatwa Jalatatwa Jadatatwa 
Linga Purusha Purusha Stree Purusha 
Stooladeha Mayadeha Manah Prakruthi Mokshadeha 
Pativarga Pitamahavarga Matruvarga Matamahivarga 
JEEVA Bratruvarga Paradeshivarga Putrivarga Nyayavadi 
Shatru Anya Stree Vaidya 
Rakshaka Dala Choravarga 
Ahankara Gupta Chanchala Niraasha 
Krodha Apasavyakarma Vyabhichara Hatavadi 
Murkhatwa Neechabuddhi Chora Vishada 
Asahana Ghoodaalochana Kapata Sankuchita GUNA Himsabuddhi Kroorabuddhi Van chana Karmavimukta 
Bhramana, Maya Chapala Adhyatma chintana 
Bhoota-Peeditha Nindaatmaka Thyagajeevi 
Apaharana Sevachintana 
Yantra Vidya Anushakti Nashtah Jnanabandana 
Rina Chakra, Chaaya Rasapadartha, Ksheera Sankuchitabuddhi 
Shatrutwa Videshavidya Prayaana, Palayana Adhyatma Jnana 
~ ~ 
YOGA Kalaha Punarabhyasa Kalaranga Vicchedana 
Himsa Buddhigrahana Vyaya, Sthanantara Nyayavidya, Rogavimukti 
Bhadha Apasavyatantra Ninda, Vanchana Mukti Marga 
Gupta-Jnana Dooshana Archaka, Vaidya 
Oorja Chaya, Chakra Rasayana Nyayadhikari 
Yantra Anushakti Ksheera Vaidya 
Vyavasaya Maayajaala Ahaara Archaka 
Nirmana Apasavya karma Kalatmaka Sankuchitakarma BOGHA Khanija Dhushkarma Pray ana Adhyatmakarma 
Rakshakadala Pardesha Karma Chalana Pardeshakarma 
Shastrachikitsa Punaravrutthi Bandana 
Bruhath Yojana Kleshakarma 
Pitta Vaatagni Kala Pitta, Aama, Peeda 
Rakta Pishachagrastha Jaladosha Badha, Klesha 
ROGA Ghaya, Danta Aghata Raktadosha Nakha, Guptanga 
"VUI'\ Majja, Mamsa Vishapreritha Andashaya Sandhibaadha 
Bhrukuti Peeda, Udharakosha Mootrakosha Vrana 
Garbhasrava Jeevakantaka Spot a 
Dakshina, Pakagni Nairuthi Vaayuvya Eeshanya 
VASTU Shayyagruha Sangrahashaala Vamavatayanam Sootra, Sopanapath 
Kartarika-Oorja Bruhath, Valaya Gavakhsa (kitaki) Tanti, Poojagruha 
Eetaka Praakara Vishala, Chaya Jalashala Sankuchita, Langoola 
68 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
PLANETARY SIGNIFICATIONS IN ENGLISH 
ORIENTAllON JEEVA DESTlNY l'v'IAI<ffiS KARMA 
GIST Self Esteem Knowledge Affluerce, tv1arriage Work 
PLANET JUPITER SUN III'EFClEIY VENUS SATURN 
Life Native Father Younger Female El. Brother 
Signification Son Sibling Wife 
Lover Daughter etc. 
Character Honour Royal Pride Intellect Luxurious Workaholic 
Benevolent Esteem Diplomatic Artistic Lazy, Slow 
Nobility Sociology Learning Expertise Past 
Knowledge Benevolence Medicine Speech Luxury, Present & 
and Legal Success Commerce Comforts Future Deeds 
Interlink Advisory Government Befriend Arts Beauty Work related 
Wisdom Feminine 
Religious Govt. Status Intelligence Marketing Profession 
Occupation Priest Prestigious Account Finance Linked to 
Preacher Medicine Business Luxuries Planets ft &Affluence Adviser Society Writing Arts Sign 
Benefactor Legacy Logic- Land Beauty Delay 
Gas Bile Gas/Bile Phlegm Gas-Phlegm 
Fat Right Eye Allergy Semen Digestive 
Disease & Liver Heart Forehead Diabetes Lungs 
Body Parts Thighs Upper belly Skin Sexual Nerves 
Jaundice Strokes Shoulders Locomotive 
Obesity Fever 
North East East North South East West 
Place of Worship Right Window Treasury Kitchen Dining 
Vastu Pooja articles Thatched Hall/Guest Bedroom Dilapidated Bldg. 
Hut Study Room Beauty & Dustbins 
Bright Place Greenery Cosmetics 
Planets and Karakatwa 69 
DESTINY MODIFIERS AND BREAKERS 
ORIENTATION EGO, MARRIAGE ILLUSIONS MIND SALVATION 
GIST Obstructed Unethical Changed Dejected 
PLANET MARS RAHU MOO KETU 
Life Husband Petemal Mother, Maternal 
Signification Brother Grand Daughter etc. Grand 
Character Haste, Anger Unethical Capricious Philosophic 
Stubborn Secretive Inconsistent Dejected 
Knowledge Technical Atomic, Wheel Liquid, Travel Divine, Legal 
Defense, Mining Foreign, Shadow Art, Change Medical, Low profile and Obstruction Unethical Blame Fraud Obstruct, Quit 
Interlink Breaks, Quarreling Eclipsing Lose, elope Divorce, Dispute 
Technical Atomic, Wheel Liquid, Travel Philosophic 
Occupation Defense Foreign, Shadow Art, Change Divine, Legal 
& Affluence Mining Unethical Blemish Low job, Obstruct 
Harass, Enmity Hard Job Cheat Loss Quit, Dispute, Arrest 
Bile, Cut, Wound Air, Fire, Pain Phlegrn Bile, Tumour 
Disease & Cells, Marrow, Danger Fear Cold, Lungs Growth, Pain 
Body Parts Muscle, Teeth Illusion, Accident Kidney Joints, Nail 
Eye brows Intestine Blood Infections Veins, Private parts 
South South West, Store North West North East 
Vastu Kitchen Big, Broad, Round Cow Shed Bathroom 
Bedroom, Wall Vacuum Left Window Divine, Steps 
Power, Sharp Shadow Water Staircase, Narrow 
Other Significations of Planets 
Languages 
Sun Sanskrit & its allied languages 
Moo Tarnil & its allied Dravidian languages 
Mar Powered languages (Mantra) 
Mer Logical and intellectual languages (Coded languages) 
jup Pali - Sanskrit (divine languages) 
Ven Expertise (literary languages-grarnrnar, style etc) 
Sat Application languages (formulas, blue prints, symbols) 
Rah Vertical or reverse reading language 
Ket Occult and rnystic languages (talisman, drawings, symbols) 
70 
Sun 
Moo 
Mar 
Mer 
Jup 
Ven 
Sat 
Rah 
Ket 
Sun 
Moo 
Mar 
Mer 
Jup 
Ven 
Sat 
Rah 
Ket 
Sun 
Moo 
Mar 
Mer 
Jup 
Ven 
Sat 
Rah 
The shapes 
Circle 
Square 
Triangle 
Arrow 
Rectangle 
Pentagonal Shape 
Three leaves together 
Wheel 
Flag 
Gotra (Heritage) 
Kashyapa 
Atreya 
Bharadwaja 
A trey a 
Angeerasa 
Bargava 
Kashyapa 
Paithenasa 
Jaimini 
The Regions 
Capital of Countries 
Watery places, and Artistic places 
Governed by force 
Intellectual, Informative 
Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Places of Human development and research 
Places of Wealth, Joy and Pleasures 
Industrial development places 
Nuclear, Petro, Deserts, and Amusement places 
Ket Historic Places, Pilgrims, and Religious places 
These will be useful to locate the place of travel. 
Sun 
Moo 
Mar 
Curse-Childlessness 
Curse of Lord Siva, Curse of Father, Garuda 
Curse of Mother 
Curse of Kartikeya or Village Deity or Enemy 
Planets and Karakatwa 
Mer 
Jup 
Ven 
Sat 
Rah 
Ket 
Sun 
Moo 
Mar 
Mer 
Jup 
Ven 
Sat 
Rah 
Ket 
Curse of Lord Vishnu, Curse of Youngsters 
Curse of Brahmin, Curse of Tree 
Curse of Woman, Curse of Cow 
Curse of Departed Souls, Yama, Peepal Tree 
Curse of Serpent 
Curse of Brahmin 
Ram a 
Krishna 
Narasimha 
Buddha 
Vamana 
Parasurama 
Koorma 
Varaha 
Matsya 
Avatars 
(no planet is assigned with kalki avatara. The lagna is considered as Kalki avatara) 
Sun 
Moo 
Mer 
Jup 
Ven 
Sat 
Rah 
Ket 
Sun 
Moo 
Mar 
Mer 
Jup 
Ven 
Sat 
Rah 
Ket 
Metals 
Gold and Copper 
Silver 
Alloy 
Tin 
Panchaloha 
Iron 
Lead 
Rusted 
Pungent 
Salt 
Spicy 
Bitter 
Sweet 
Sour 
Cold 
Astringent 
Stale 
Taste 
71 
72 
Sun 
Moo 
Mar 
Mer 
Jup 
Ven 
Sat 
Rah 
Ket 
Sun 
Moo 
Mar 
Mer 
Jup 
Ven 
Sat 
Rah 
Ket 
Sun 
Moo 
Mar 
Mer 
Jup 
Ven 
Sat 
Rah 
Ket 
Sun 
Moo 
Mar 
Mer 
Trees 
Giant milkweed (Ark-Sanskrit) 
Drumstick 
Cutch tree (Khadirah-Sanskrit) 
Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Prickly Chaff Flower (apamarga-Sanskrit) Uttareni (South)) 
Peepal Tree 
Fig Tree 
Suma Tree (Bot.Pfaffia paniculata) 
Daub Grass (Durva) 
Thatch Grass (Kusha) 
Gemstones 
Ruby (Manikya) 
Pearl (Mutya) 
Coral (Pravala) 
Emerald (Marakata) 
Yellow Sapphire (Pushyaraga) 
Diamond (Vajra) 
Blue Sapphire (Neelamani) 
Agate or Hessonite (Gomedhika) 
Cats Eye (Vydoorya) 
Cereals 
Wheat 
Rice 
Red Gram 
Green Gram 
Bengal Gram 
Beans 
Sesame 
Black Gram 
Horse Gram 
King 
Queen 
Commander 
Prince 
Status 
Planets and Karakatwa 
Jup 
Ven 
Sat 
Rah 
Ket 
Sun 
Moo 
Mar 
Mer 
Jup 
Ven 
Sat 
Rah 
Ket 
Sun 
Moo 
Mar 
Mer 
Jup 
Ven 
Sat 
Rah 
Ket 
Minister 
Minister 
Servant 
Low Class People 
Saints, Seers 
Deities 
Siva 
Parvathi 
Subrahmania 
Vishnu 
Brahma (Dakshina Murthy)-Guru 
Lakshmi 
Varna 
Chamundeshwari 
Ganesha 
Subjects 
Political Science. Social Science 
Arts, Psychology, Chemistry, Water, Hotel Management 
Engineering, Physics, Mining, irrigation. 
Accounting, Maths, Statistics, Logic, Educational 
Audit and Accounts, Philosophy 
Higher studies, Marketing, Housekeeping 
Departmental, Work-related training 
Chemical, Nuclear Physics, Foreign related 
73 
Medical, Theology, Astrology, Law, Handworks, Endowment 
Chapter 11 
Q: In your earlier works you have given destiny makers and destiny breakers- but in destiny makers 
there are mutually opposition and also in destiny breakers there are certain material benefits. How 
to recognise them while studying horoscope? 
A: As a matter of fact the original grouping is right in its sense except that Jupiter and Saturn were 
included as destiny makers. But the present workshop experience has opened up the new avenue to 
regroup the planets. 
PATTERN OF KARAKAlWA 
In the first chapter we have seen how the planetary orbits are being inter linked with 
Zodiac and the methodology of arriving at the sequence of Hora, Dasha and Week Day. 
In Chapter 6 we have seen the Karma, Jeeva and Deha passing through the group 
consisting of Moon, Rahu and Ketu and reaching the 3'd group Atma, Buddhi and Bogha. 
The entire philosophy of Naadi is in this three groups. Before we give the Rules for 
Navagraha Naadi, we shall discuss this principle in detail which will make the reader to 
understand the rules very easily in the next chapter. 
Saturn Karma (Deed) Karaka, Jupiter Jeeva (Life) Karaka and Mars Deha (Body) 
For a Jeeva to take birth on the Earth, Saturn (Karma) is the cause. This Karma is the 
accumulated deeds of past births, which are again inter linked to the Buddhi, Bogha and 
Atma. Unless, Vasana attached to Atma is cleared, the Jeeva cannot get the Atma 
Darshana. Therefore, to clear these Vasana, the Jeeva takes the birth again with the 
balance of Karma. The Karma and Jeeva both are the basis for a birth. 
Both karma and jeeva need an identification on the earth. Ego (Ahankara) as Deha, 
represented by Mars is the identification for both. 
In order to perceive and perform, the Body gets the Mind which is revolving around the 
Earth with its two generative points representing Maya and Moksha. Both these are 
resultant factors of Mind. 
With the effect of balance Karma and the nature of ego, the mind directs either Jeeva 
or karma or both, through Rahutowards the materialistic links of 3'd group i.e. Sun the 
Pride, Mercury the Intelligence and the Venus the Pleasures and Comforts. If balance of 
karma ends in this birth, the mind will direct Jeeva or karma or both, through Ketu 
towards metaphysical links of 3'd group, Atma, Buddhi and Bogha. 
This leads us to infer that the connection of Karma Karaka Saturn and/or Jeeva Karaka 
Jupiter to "SUN, MEFO.JRY and VENUS" is the destiny for which the birth has taken place. 
Whether such link to the Destiny trine is of materialistic nature or metaphysical nature 
or both, is decided by the mental trine (Moon, Rahu and Ketu) 
Paltern of Karakatwa 75 
Any connection of Ketu to Karma (Saturn) or Jeeva (Jupiter) will create obstruction in 
materialistic links. The Moon will try to modify or change or even go abnormal to get the 
materialistic benefits. 
Though Rahu is a materialistic supporter, being a 'Kalapurusha' and a Maya (illusion) 
karaka will create full opportunity for sinful gains and also cause dangers and irksome 
situation in life to restrict Jeeva or Karma to realise and rectify the past mistakes. 
The Mars is ego which if predominant either with Jeeva or Karma, will cause hindrance 
to clear any karma and in such occasions extra efforts are needed which the mind (Moon) 
or the Karma (Saturn) may resist. 
With these explanations we are coming to conclusion that: 
1. In terms of materialistic benefits the planets, Mars, Moon, Ketu are disturbing factors 
and the planet Rahu creates problems to Jeeva karakas. Therefore in Navagraha Naadi 
we designate them as "Destiny Breakers". 
2. In terms of metaphysical activity, the planets, Mars, Moon, Ketu are viewed in 
different angles to indicate the progressive direction towards salvation and Rahu 
indicate the diversions and dangers in that direction. 
3. There are only 3 planets involved for both material and metaphysical factors. They 
are Sun, Mercury and Venus. Sun: in material matters indicates the Prestige, Honour, 
Fame, Success and the bondage with Son and Father etc., and at the metaphysical 
side it indicates the Atma. Mercury: in material matters indicates the worldly 
knowledge, commerce and bondage with younger sibling etc. and at metaphysical level 
it indicates the higher knowledge, secret knowledge and helps Jeeva to realise Atma. 
Venus: in material matters indicates the Luxuries and Pleasure. For metaphysical 
matters it prompts "Tantra Marga" (Tantra includes Mantra, Yantra & Mudra, a 
higher form of ritualistic and individualistic Sadhana). 
4. If only Jupiter is connected to these planets, the Jeeva has to achieve all these matters 
in this birth. If Saturn alone is connected, at a particular time, the Jeeva yields to 
karma and get all these due to previous karma. 
5. The connection of Jupiter to Saturn indicates that the Jeeva is bound by previous 
karma also. That is why this combination is called Dharma KarmadiYoga. (It is the 
combination of karakatwa of planet Jupiter as Dharma linked to Karma, and the other 
Karakatwa of Jeeva is bound by Karma only). 
6. The drama of life begins with the interfering factors Ego (Mars), Mind (Moon) and 
its other two energy zones i.e. Rahu and Ketu, who will distract or disturb the matters 
of Sun, Mercury and Venus. 
7. Navagraha Naadi is based on this philosophy and the karakatwa of planets have been 
grouped accordingly. 
8. These planetary combinations need to be studied with the necessary Rashi karakatwa 
to have the clear understanding of the combination. 
Chapter 12 
Q: Will there be any difference in results predicted through conventional astrology and Naadi 
Astrology? How these two systems work differently? 
A: Absolutely there is a vast difference in application of principles but the ultimate results will be same 
because all the systems are propounded by great sages. 
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN CONVENTIONAL 
ASTROLOGY AND RAO'S SYSTEM (Navagraha Naadi) 
After publishing the book "Prediction secrets - Naadi Astrology", many students of 
astrology have approached me with doubts as to how to proceed with a birth chart through 
Naadi astrology. Though the principle laid down is simple, it was confusing for those who 
had studied conventional methods of Astrology. It was difficult for them to come out of 
the concept of Lagna, Bhava and aspects of conventional methods. In many cases they 
were not convinced that a horoscope can be analysed without the Lagna and Bhava 
components. This made me to rethink the methodology of teaching the Naadi astrology. 
I have evolved a comparative method using conventional method and relating it to Rao's 
system of Naadi analysis. When this method was adopted the students were able to grasp 
the secret behind the principles in Naadi system. In this chapter I am sharing this method 
for the benefit of the readers. 
Conventional Method 
Time of birth, Lagna and Bhava divisions are essential features of conventional method. 
Navagraha Naadi 
Time of birth is required to know the Hora and sub Hora Lords. 
Lagna is required to know visible and invisible signs. 
Bhava division is not considered. However a sign is divided as per Hora sequence which 
is akin to the Ashtaka Varga in conventional astrology. This is to show the planets position 
in kakshya. Kakshya means path or band. This is studied not only in birth chart analysis 
but also in timing the events in transit. This is a most advanced study in Naadi system 
which is not covered in this work. 
Conventional Method 
In general there are 16 Varga charts prepared traditionally to study the different faculties 
of life. 
Navagraha Naadi 
No such charts are required except a Navamsha chart to study transit of planets in 
advanced system of Naadi Astrology. 
Difference Between Conventional Astrology and Rao's System (Navagraha Naadi) 77 
Conventional Method 
The matters of life are studied by Bhava, 1) Tanu Bhava (self and body) 2) Dhana Bhava 
(wealth) 3) Sodara Bhava (siblings) 4) Vidya, Sukha & Matru Bhava (learning, comforts 
and mother) 5) Santhana & Jana Bhava (progeny, higher knowledge) 6) Raga, Ripu, Rina 
Bhava (disease, debt and enmity) 7) Kalatra Bhava (marital bliss) 8) Randhra, Ayur Bhava 
(difficulties and longevity) 9) Bhagya, Pitru Bhava (fortune and father) 10) Karma, Keerti 
Bhava (profession, fame, name) 11) Labha Bhava (gains) 12) Vyaya & Mukti Bhava (loss 
and salvation). 
The assessment is made on the basis of these Bhavas counted from Lagna. The phala 
adhyaya (delineations chapter) prescribes analysis of Bhava with the position of planets 
in these houses, benefic or malefic links to it. Similarly it also prescribes, similar tests 
to be conducted on lords of these houses, their position, and aspect to it by, benefic and 
malefic. The same rules are also applied to the planets as karakas, as predetermined by 
sages. 
For each Lagna there are yoga (benefic) planets, Karaka (signification) planets and 
Maraka (death inflicting) planets. We need to know the strength of the planets by working 
out Shadbala (sixfold strength). Then the timing of events is based on Dasha of planets. 
There are umpt~en numbers of such rules, which are endless with different thoughts and 
opinion expressed by sages, acharyas and the modern authors. 
However, if the dictums are properly studied and understood, this is definitely a classic 
form of chart analysis. 
Navagraha Naadi 
In this system all the above exercises are not essential. 
To analyse Tanu Bhava of conventional astrology, in Naadi system, for male native, we 
take the planet Jupiter to assess, his character, health and longevity and for female 
horoscope, we take planet Venus. In both the cases, the purpose of birth and life 
orientation is studied through Jupiter only. Similarly, the study of general life of the 
native's relatives is studied by the respective planet representing the relationship. For 
example, for male native, Venus is wife, for female native Mars is husband (7th bhava 
and respective karaka in conventional astrology), in both the cases, the Mercury 
represents younger siblings (3rd bhava & Karaka), Mars the brother (3rd bhava), Saturn, 
the elder brother (11th bhava), Sun the father (9th bhava) and the son (5th bhava), 
Moon the mother (4th bhava), Mother-in-law (1Oth bhava) and Daughter (5th or 7th 
bhava) etc. 
In Navagraha Naadi studying a planet means, to select a planet for required matter and 
note the karakatwa of planets situated in trine, 2"d, 1ih and 71h to a selected planet. 
Planets in the same sign, 51h and gth places from the selected planet are considered to 
be together being in the same direction. For example if we want to know the character 
78 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
of and life orientation of the native. We have to select Jupiter and note the qualities of 
the sign where Jupiter is posited. This will indicate the basic nature of the native. This 
will be further modified by the signification of planets posited along with jubilated in the 
same sign or planets in 5th, 9th, 2nd, 12th, 7th sign from Jupiter. Similarly for studying: 
Dhana Bhava (2nd bhava), We take Venus and study the effect of material karakatwa 
of planets to know the quality/quantity of wealth etc. 
For Sodara/parakrama Bhava (3rd bhava), we take Mercury or Mars depending on 
situation and analyse the matter as above. 
For Matru, Sukha Bhava (4th bhava), we take Moon and Venus. 
For Santhana, Jnana Bhava (5th bhava), we take male planets except nodes as male 
progeny and female planets as female progeny to be linked to Jeeva karaka Jupiter to 
know the children matter and Mercury for other speculative matters. 
For Rina, Ripu, Roga Bhava (6th, bhava), we study Jeevakaraka represented by 
respective planet and its relationship with destiny breakers and enemy planets. 
For Kalatra Bhava (ih bhava), we study Venus in relation to Jupiter and Mars, and 
Mars in relation to Venus and Mercury. 
For Kalatra Bhava (7th bhava), we study Venus in relation to Jupiter and Mars, and 
Mars in relation to Venus and Mercury. 
For Randhra Bhava (8th bhava), we take Rahu, Ketu, Moon and Mars in relation to 
Jeevakaraka. 
For Pitru and Bhagya Bhava (9th Bhava), we take, Sun, Venus for Pitru (father) and 
Bhagya {fortune). 
For Karma Bhava 10th bhava), we take Saturn for profession. 
For Labha Bhava (11th bhava), Gains and Elder brother, we take, Venus, Saturn and 
Jupiter. 
For Vyaya/Moksha Bhava (12th bhava), we take Moon & Ketu for loss and salvation. 
However the rules for Naadi and the subsequent chapters with examples will give the clear 
idea of Navagraha Naadi. To be precise, in naadi for all the matters of 12 houses of 
conventional astrology, we take the planet representing the matter and study the 
relationship of other planets and combine the signification to arrive at the results. 
Therefore, the use of Lagna and Bhava are all converted into Karakatwa and then results 
are derived in Navagraha Naadi. 
Conventional Method 
The timing of events is based on Dasha of planets. 
Navagraha Naadi 
There is no Dasha system. The timing of events is based on transit of planets. 
Difference Between Conventional Astrology and Rao's System (Navagraha Naadi) 79 
Conventional Method 
The Horary astrology is separate entity in conventional method. 
Navagraha Naadi 
The horary chart is an essential integral part of Navagraha Naadi. 
Conventional Method 
Remedial measures are based on different debatable methods. 
Navagraha Naadi 
Remedial measures are based on Karma theory. It is clear this system whether a remedy 
can be advocated or not. Remedies are based on the blocking the negative effects of 
Destiny modifiers and breakers. 
To conclude this chapter we shall give a horoscope, to show how a chart is analysed by 
conventional and Navagraha Naadi methods to clarify the doubts about Naadi method. 
Example 6 
The Chart 
AC 0' 21" 
MO 8' 56" 
H MA 27' 2" cp tl II 
KE 23' 42" ME 0' 2RX 
5U 2' 56" 
VE 10' 9" 
~ 
Rasi 
;;!! 
RA 23' 42' 
\1 .Q. 
SA 21' 4Rx 
JU 2' 10RxX' 111. ..IL llJl 
Major Minor Starts Ends Start 
SUn Ven 19/07/60 08/01/61 0 
Moon Moon 08/01/61 08/11/61 0 
Moon Mars 08/11/61 09/06/62 1 
Moon Rahu 09/06/62 09/12/63 1 
Moon Jup 09/12/63 09/04/65 3 
Moon Sat 09/04/65 08/11/66 4 
Moon Mere 09/11/66 09/04/68 6 
Moon Ketu 09/04/68 08/11/68 7 
Moon Ven 07/11/68 09/07/70 8 
Moon SUn 09/07/70 08/01/71 9 
MO JU KE 
H cp tl II 
SU ME 
NY ;;!! NY 
Navamsa 
AC 
\1 .Q 
MA RA VE SA 
X' 111. ::!!: llJl 
Major Minor Starts Ends Start 
Mars Mars 08/01/71 06/06/71 10 
Mars Rahu 06/06/71 24/06/72 10 
Mars Jup 24/06/72 31/05/73 11 
Mars Sat 30/05/73 09/07/74 12 
Mars Mere 10/07/74 07/07/75 13 
Mars Ketu 07/07/75 03/12/75 14 
Mars Ven 03/12/75 01/02/77 15 
Mars SUn 01/02/77 09/06/77 16 
Mars Moon 09/06/77 08/01/78 16 
Rahu Rahu 08/01/78 20/09/80 17 
80 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Major Minor Starts Ends Start Major Minor Starts Ends Start 
Rahu Jup 20/09/80 14/02/83 20 &It S3.t 08/01/12 ll/01/15 51 
Rahu &It 13/02/83 20/12/85 22 &It Mere 11/01/15 20/09/17 54 
Rahu Mere 21/12/85 09/07/88 25 &It Ketu 20/09/17 30/10/18 57 
Rahu Ketu 08/07/88 27/07/89 27 &It Ven 30/10/18 30/12/21 58 
Rahu Ven 27/07/89 27/07/92 29 S3.t Sun 30/12/21 12/12/22 61 
Rahu Sun 27/07/92 21/06/93 32 &It Moon 12/12/22 12/07/24 62 
Rahu Moon 21/06/93 21/12/94 32 &It Mars 12/07/24 21/08/25 63 
Rahu Mars 20/12/94 08/01/96 34 &It Rahu 21/08/25 27/06/28 65 
Jup Jup 08/01/96 25/02/98 35 &It Jup 27/06/28 08/01/31 67 
Jup &It 26/02/98 08/09/00 37 Mere Mere 08/01/31 06/06/33 70 
Jup Mere 08/09/00 15/12/02 40 Mere Ketu 06/06/33 03/06/34 72 
Jup Ketu 15/12/02 21/11/03 42 Mere Ven 03/06/34 03/04/37 73 
Jup Ven 21/11/03 22/07/06 43 Mere Sun 03/04/37 07/02/38 76 
Jup Sun 22/07/06 10/05/07 46 Mere Moon 08/02/38 10/07/39 77 
Jup Moon 10/05/07 08/09/08 46 Mere Mars 10/07/39 06/07/40 78 
Jup Mars 08/09/08 15/08/09 48 Mere Rahu 06/07/40 23/01/43 79 
Jup Rahu 14/08/09 08/01/12 49 Mere Jup 23/01/43 30/04/45 82 
The birth details are with held. This is a male horoscope. 
Character analysis and health matters 
Conventional Method 
1st House, Taurus, 3'd Lord Moon is posited there. It is an exalted place for Moon. There 
is an exchange between Lagna lord and 3rd Lord. Both the planets have become good. 
A good planet is in Lagna and the Lagna Lord is posited in Cancer 3'd House. Lagna lord 
is with Mercury a friend to Lagna Lord who is also Lord of 2 and 5. Lagna has become 
strong. 4th Lord is with Lagna lord. 4th Lord and 5th Lord combination is a yoga therefore, 
Mercury is a yoga karaka but he is combust with Sun and hence, only Sun should give 
results. Venus (Lagna lord) is associated with yoga karaka in the 3'd house whose lord Moon 
is in Lagna an exalted sign. 3'd house supports predominantly the Lagna. 
The native is maintaining very good health till date except that he is accident prone 
and there is no danger to life as Saturn in 8th house along with ath Lord Jupiter and 
both have aspect of Rahu while Jupiter aspects mutually Rahu and by 5th aspect links 
Mars 8th lord and Karaka for progeny both are in 8th house ensuring longevity. Though 
accidents were there, native was protected due to Jupiter's influence. 
Navagraha Naadi. We take Jupiter 
Jupiter in his own house and retrograde, with Saturn who is also retro resulting in dharma 
karmadi yoga. Mars is in 5th to Jupiter should give him short temper but in gth Rahu is 
there who is enemy to Mars. Saturn who is with Jupiter is also an enemy to Mars. Mars 
instead of giving short temper has given a sober nature. The combination Rahu, Saturn, 
Mars should give him accidents, and Jupiter should protect from dangers to life. 
Longevity assured in Naadi as Rahu has become weak to shallow Jupiter and Jupiter gets 
lease in first round of Rahu. In second round Rahu has many planets before reaching 
Difference Between Conventional Astrology and Rao's System (Navagraha Naadi) 81 
Jupiter. Moreover Saturn by retro link to Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon indicating pending 
karma of the planets. This ensures good longevity. 
Education 
Conventional Method 
The 4th House is Leo and Rahu is posited in it. Rahu cast his aspect on Saturn in 8th who 
is yoga karaka for this ascendant who is also supported by Jupiter. Instead of Saturn, Rahu 
has become yoga Karaka. Rahu gets connection by his links to Mars who is in Aries, 
indicating technical nature. The Karaka Mercury is with Venus who is not only a friend 
to Mercury but also Lagna lord. The 4th lord is with Mercury. The dispositor of Mercury 
lord Cancer Moon is posited in Lagna. Thus 4th house has all good effect though 4th lord 
has gone to 3rd house. He has completed his engineering and also MBA. 
Navagraha Naadi 
The Mercury is with Sun and Venus. This itself a sure signification of success in 
education as both Jupiter and Saturn by retro links. Due to exchange with Venus 
Moon comes to Cancer. It should indicate changes and travel in education. Of 
course, the native had to travel a lot. Mercury is retrograde and goes to his own 
house Gemini getting the link of Ketu and the link of both Jupiter and Saturn who 
in turn linked to Mars. Basically, the native was intending to do medicine, but the 
destiny has changed due to connection of Mars and he did education related to 
power. The connection of Sun (success) and Venus (higher education) to Mercury 
made him to do MBA. 
1 
Profession 
Conventional Method 
1oth House, Aquarius, has Ketu in it and no other planet is either conjunct or connected 
by aspect. 10th house has the aspect of its own lord Saturn from 8th house. This indicates 
foreign related job. 1oth house has the aspect of Rahu from 4th house. Rahu is aspects 
Mars. This should give him technical job. The dispositor of Rahu Sun has gone to 3'd 
house linking Mercury and Venus. Sun with the effect of Rahu, Mercury and Venus aspect 
house of fortune the gth house. This also indicate foreign related job. Saturn also aspect 
5th house and the 5th and 2"d Lord Mercury with Lagna Lord. Due to involvement of 
Mercury houses, 2 and 5 are linked. This indicates speculative business as Lord of 7 and 
12 Mars aspect Mercury. yth and 12th Lord has the aspect of Jupiter. All these have 
contributed to native to take up technical job locally and also serve in foreign country 
in technical line. Later on, he started his own business then involved in speculation 
business and made huge money. 
82 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Navagraha Naadi 
For Profession we should study Saturn: 
Saturn is retrograde and is with Jupiter who is also retrograde. From this position in 5th 
sign Mars is posited ensuring a technical nature of Job. Mercury is in Cancer and by retro 
goes to Gemini and links both Saturn and Jupiter indicating the business in the later part 
of life as profession in the technical line . The retrograde Mercury is with Sun and Venus 
who exchange with Moon. It indicates that there will be a government related job for 
short period. This is due to the fact that Sun is a government planet and Mercury is going 
away from Sun and in exchange with Venus, Moon comes to Mercury. The Mercury from 
his direct position gets the links of Saturn and Jupiter both retro. Mercury, Sun, Venus 
in the house of Moon, have links by both Jupiter and Saturn. Moon a travel planet also 
directly links Saturn and Jupiter who is also connected to Rahu, which indicates foreign 
job. This person has indeed worked in gulf Countries for quite some time. The same 
combination also indicates speculation business. He has made huge profits in speculation 
business. 
Marriage 
Conventional method 
ih House is Scorpio. This has aspect by the own Lord. Lord's aspect on own house makes 
it stronger. ih house has links by 3rd Lord Moon from his exalted sign. The Moon though 
3'd lord is the dispositor of 2nd and 5th Lord associated with Sun 4th Lord forming a good 
yoga and associated with Lagna lord. Therefore, 3'd malefic nature is meager compared 
to the quantum of good effects. 
Rahu aspect ih Lord. Naturally this person got married during RahuNenus period. Rahu 
being enemy to Mars and Jupiter being 8th Lord with Saturn effect aspecting ih lord has 
not created marital problem but delayed the marriage and given health problems to wife. 
Navagraha Naadi 
In the male horoscope we should consider Venus for marriage. The link of Jupiter or Saturn 
will ensure the marriage. Venus is in Cancer and both Jupiter and Saturn by retro position 
from Scorpio links it. Whenever Saturn link is there, the marriage will be delayed. In other 
words the marriage is governed by karma planet Saturn and hence in the first round the 
marriage will not be given. Only in 2nd round he will perform the marriage. When Saturn 
came to Sagittarius during 1989 and became retrograde and when Jupiter was transiting 
in Gemini the marriage took place. Transit Saturn by retro connects to Natal Venus. 
Mercury who is with Venus in Cancer in natal chart by his retro motion connects to transit 
Jupiter in Gemini. This period matches with the Dasha period as mentioned in conventional 
analysis. 
(Only for marriage timing of event is explained here, in subsequent chapters Naadi transits are 
dealt in detail) 
Difference Between Conventional Astrology and Rao's System (Navagraha Naadi) 83 
Venus being in Moon house and with Sun an enemy planet, enemy sign and has links by 
retro Saturn and Jupiter, the wife had, blood related problems. Rahu with Mars connects 
Venus through Jupiter and Saturn. She underwent piles operation. She has obesity problem 
and digestive disorders. Jupiter's involvement is a saving point for the wife of native. 
Child birth 
Conventional Method 
5th House is Vrigo. The house has aspect of Saturn a natural malefic. But Saturn is with 
Jupiter a benefic planet and also karaka for progeny. Being a functional yoga karaka 
supported by a benefic planet, though he has lost powers of his own houses as yoga karaka, 
his aspect has become good to 5th house. The Lord of 5th house Mercury is posited in 3'd 
house which is 11th to 5th house and he is combust with Sun but being retrograde he has 
become strong and being with Lagna lord he has attained more power. Apart from this 
the dispositer of Mercury, the lord of 3'd house is in Lagna which is an exalted sign to 
him. The Lord of 5th house Mercury is in a female sign and with a female planet. The 
Sun though a male planet being in Moon's house supports female child. The native has 
two female issues. 
Navagraha Naadi: 
Jupiter linked to Sun or Mars will give male children. If Jupiter links female planets, Moon 
or Venus it gives female issues. Similarly Saturn also behaves but with some delay. In 
this case, Jupiter and Saturn both from Sagittarius link Mars. Mars is linked to Rahu 
who is a bitter enemy and a life swallowing planet. Mars being weak fails to give result. 
Both Saturn and Jupiter by retro position link Moon in Taurus, Venus and Sun are in 
Cancer. Sun though a male planet is with a female planet and also in a female sign and 
his dispositer is a female planet and placed in a female sign. Therefore, Moon and Venus 
are fruitful planets signifying daughters. The native has two female issues. 
This example is given to differentiate the method of analysis. The principles of Navagraha 
Naadi are simple and there are no alternatives to it. But the rules are to be applied logically 
with the inter-linking factors to decide the right combination. 
The essential qualification to get hold of this subject is to master the karakatwa of 
planets. The most important thing is to treat it as a separate entity and not to mix up 
with conventional astrological principles. Both the systems are whole and complete in their 
structure and two different applications are distinctly to be understood and applied 
independently. 
Role of L..agna in Navagraha Naadi 
Marked lagna in a chart has an unique use in Naadi system. When lagna is computed, 12th 
to 8th signs would have already risen and ih sign will be setting. From_2nd to 6th signs are 
84 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
yet to rise. Therefore, from 1ih to 8th signs will be in the visible half and 2 to 6th will 
be in the invisible half. Lagna will be rising in visible half and ih sign will be setting in 
invisible half. 
The signs falling in visible half will have matters hidden from the past. The signs falling 
in invisible half will have the matters needed self efforts. Similarly, the planets in the 
invisible half represents matter that needs efforts and planets in the visible half will have 
matters hidden from the past, either, supportive or destructive to self efforts. 
The details are dealt in the next chapter. Therefore, lagna consideration is also important 
in Naadi astrology. 
PREDICTIVE TOOLS 
Rules of Navagraha Naadi 
• Planets and Matters of Life 
e 
Yoga Phala from Combination of Planet 
CD 
Timing of Event-Rules & Examples 
Chapter 13 
RULES OF NAVAGRAHA NAADI 
Most important Primary Rules 
I. No horoscope to be studied without considering the Hora chart at the time of 
consultation, this is essential because, through horary chart certain secrets are 
revealed. 
2. The study of Sun-trine and Moon-trine along with respective Karma-trine will indicate 
the self doings or un-doings and the relevant past karma effects. 
From macrocosm to microcosm, from celestial to earthly factors and from 
estimation to evaluation all the dictums are logically inter linked. This astonishing 
effort of our sages can be seen in Naadi astrology. One such wonderful dictum is 
to combine the significations of planets posited in the sings 1, 5, 9, 2, 12, and 7 
to the signification of a selected planet. The logic behind this dictum is explained 
below. 
Amazingly scaling down the physical science of universe into metaphysical science 
and using the space concept of zodiac, the time concept of planets, the importance 
of Lagna in dividing visible & invisible half of Zodiac, identification of Sun-trine and 
Moon-trine, our sages have established the relationship with macrocosm and 
microcosm. The Naadi relationship among the planets is based on the Sun & Moo 
trine and their Karma-trine. The Sun trines represent "Rinanubandha" (debt 
bondage). Sun karma-trine represent "Prarabdhakarma" (destiny). The Moon-trine 
represent "Bhavanubandha" (emotional bondage). The Moon Karma-trine indicates 
the "Kriyamanakarma" (actions of free will). 
A planet in a Sun-trine will establish "Rinanubandha" with the planets in 5th and gth 
signs, both being Sun-trines. It wi II also establish the relation with ih being its 
"Prarabdhakarma" (Destiny). This planet will be supported by "Bhavanubandha 
(emotional bondage) in 12th Moon trine sign and the "Kriyamanakarma" (actions of 
free will) in Moon sign in 2nd. Similarly a planet in Sun Karma-trine will get the 
"Prarabdhakarma" from 5th & gth and "Rinanubandha" from ih sign. The 12th Moon 
karma sign indicates "Kriyamanakarma" (actions of free will) and the 2nd Moon trine 
sign indicate "Bhavanubandha' (emotional bondage). 
A planet in Moon trine will establish "Bhavanubandha" (emotional bondage) in signs 
5th and gth both being Moon trines. It will also establish the relation with ih being 
its "Kriyamanakarma" (actions of free will). This planet will be influenced by 
"Prarabdhakarma" (destiny) in 12th sign a Sun Karma-trine and in 2nd sign it indicates 
the "Rinanubandha' (Debt relation) from Sun-trine. Similarly a planet in Moon 
86 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Karma-trine will establish relation with 51h and gth sign of its "Kriyamanakarma'. 
In yth it establishes the "Bhavanubandha' being a Moon trine. It will be influenced 
by "Rinanubandha" of Sun trine from 12th and in 2nd it indicates the 
"Prarabdhakarma' from Sun Karma-trine. 
1, 5, 9 being the major trine of same elemental factors, they are considered 
together. ylh is a modifier either to karma or bondage. 1 ih is support of either 
karma or bondage and 2nd is the opportunity to karma or bondage. The qualitative 
factors like good or bad are judged by the friendship, enmity, positional dignities 
of planets from these signs. 
A careful deep study of works of our sages on astrology will reveal that they 
have based every fundamental sequentially with convincing algorithm and 
propounded their dictums not giving room for any hypothesis. Naadi linking 
factor from places 1, 5, 9, 2, 7, and 12 is based on Sun-trine and Moon-trine. 
These two trines are based on Karma theory. Karma theory is inter linked with 
Zodiac. Zodiac resulted from the orbit of planets. Orbit of planets relates to 
positioning of planets. Position of planets is in sequences with time and space. 
Time and space is the key factor of secrets of human birth and death. Planets 
themselves are symbolic representation of human elements. This is the 
wonderful revelation from Naadi Jyotisha. 
3. To consider planets in visible half and invisible half of zodiac to understand the present 
efforts and past support. 
The division of visible half by Lagna will indicate the "Sanchitakarma' (accumulated 
karma/destiny) and the invisible half will indicate the "Prarabdha" and "Agamikarma" 
(present birth karma-freewill). A planet in the visible half will indicate the influence of 
past karma and a planet in the invisible half wi II indicate the self efforts needed for 
a particular event. If there is friendly connection between the planets in the two divisions 
it indicates the mutual support from past and present for a given matter. If they are 
enemies then it will indicate the opposing factors. 
Rules ofNavagraha Naadi 
Example 7 
Rah 
Moo 
' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' 
87 
In the above chart in the visible half Saturn is hemmed between two powerful mental 
orientated planets, Rahu and Moon. Rahu indicates "Apasavya karma" (unethical deeds) 
which is influencing the Saturn (karma karaka) who is in the house of service. Whereas 
Moon is in the house of Jeeva karaka Jupiter. Saturn is linked on the other side to Venus 
Bogha (pleasure) planet. It is clear indication that by apasavya (unethical) karma the 
native enjoys Bogha, provided the Moon under the control of Jeeva karaka supports by 
the self efforts. Moon the mind is connected to Atma and Buddhi in the effort-full half 
represented by Sun and Mercury in Aries. On the other hand it is linked to Jeeva karaka 
himself who is stubborn enough to go to Mukti -marga and is supported by Sun and 
Mercury. 
Therefore, this native, though there was "Apasavya Karma" (unethical deed) from the 
past to perform and enjoy the life, has submitted to the modified mind to do righteous 
karma. Due to fame he developed ego and was subjected to blames. This is due to 
involvement of Moon in the exchange of Sun and Mars. 
This division of visible and invisible half will indicate the brought forward effects, 
capabilities to accept, reject and rectify the past deeds. 
Subject to above important points the following are the: 
Rules for Chart Analysis in Navagraha Naadi 
1. In all the dual lordship signs, a planet is situated in one sign will also have its influence 
on the other sign. For example, a planet in Aries will also influence the sign Scorpio. 
2. A Sign lord will carry the karakatwa of the planet posited in its sign. For example if 
Ketu is in Venus sign, Venus will behave like Ketu 
3. A planet posited in a sign will affect the karakatwa of the sign lord also. 
4. A Planet influencing a sign lord wi II also influence the sign in turn and the planets posited 
in that sign. 
88 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
With due respect to the great author of astrology books, late Sri J.N. Bhasin, the above 
rules authenticated in his original works were applied on numerous charts in Naadi 
workshop and class room sessions. The experiments yielded excellent results. 
Example 8 
The rules mentioned above are very important. While studying horoscope dispositer theory 
is to be carefully noted to understand the matter hidden in such dispositions. For this 
purpose we give one example which is taken from the Bhrigu Nandi Naadi of Sri R.G. Roo 
page 14 Chart 2. 
Jup Sat Mar 
Sun Moo Ven 
Ket 
Mer 
Chart from 
Bhrighu Nandi 
Page 14: Chart 2 
Rah 
Mars is with Venus and in sign of Mars debilitated Saturn is with Moon. Mars therefore, 
represent significations of both Saturn and Moon. Rahu is in the exalted sign of Mercury 
and the Mercury is in Aquarius. Mercury also represents Rahu karakatwa. Mercury is in 
Saturn house. The Saturn carries the significations of Mercury. 
With these planetary dispositions we will study the few points explained which will give 
the importance of the above rules. 
It is said that the wife of this native eloped with another person after giving birth to a 
Son. Venus and Mars are together in Venus sign. Mars is the dispositer of Saturn and Moon. 
Saturn is the dispositer of Mercury. Rahu is directly linked to Venus and Mars. Being an 
enemy to Mars, Rahu will drive away Mars. Venus gets the link of Moon (the capricious 
nature) along with debilitated Saturn (the low level person) through Mars (who is dispositor 
of Saturn and Moon) for physical relation. Saturn gets the signification of Mercury (who 
also represent Rahu a secretive planet) to exhibit friendship. The Moon and Rahu indicate 
illicit relationship and Moon indicates elopement. The eloping of wife is justified. Then 
why elope after giving birth to a &n? 
Jupiter is in Pisces along with Sun. The Jeevakaraka is assured with a birth of Son. This 
Rules ofNavagraha Naadi 89 
should happen after marriage. Between 0 &12 years of age, Jupiter operates from 
Pisces, between 13 & 24 years from Aries. From 25 to 36 years Jupiter operates in 
Taurus where Venus is posited. Therefore, Jupiter should give the marriage during this 
period. At the age of 27 I 28, Jupiter will be transiting in Cancer and Leo. Leo is the 
right place for birth of Son because Sun as dispositer is with Jupiter. Therefore, at the 
28th year the Son was born to the native. At 29th and 30th year of native the Saturn 
will be transiting in Aries and Rahu will be in Leo and Ketu will be on natal Mercury giving 
the effect of illicit friendship and the cunning nature. The wife eloped during this period. 
The nature of other person who eloped with wife of native is obviously questionable due 
to Moon, Mars, Mercury links to Saturn. The woman felt the wrath from this person 
and realised her mistake. This is due to the fact that Jupiter and Sun are in 11'h to 
Venus and Jupiter during his transit in Virgo to Libra will heal this situation. By the time 
Jupiter reaches end of Scorpio, Saturn would have left Venus in Taurus. 
This example is given here to show the importance of transfer of signification of planets 
through their sign lords which gives the in-depth study of horoscope with convincing 
logic. 
In Naadi we do not consider the conventional aspects. We consider the relationship of 
planets placed in the following places from a planet under study. 
5. Two or more planets placed in one sign, within in a quarter (Pada) of star are 
considered to be powerfully associated. Degree-wise a planet ahead will give its 
karakatwa to the planet behind. Close conjunction in the same quarter of a star also 
leads to Combust, Eclipse, and War status of planets, to be studied carefully to arrive 
at proper modified significations. 
6. Two or more planets in the same star is considered to be powerfully associated next 
in order. 
7. Two or more planets in the same sign is considered to be powerfully associated next 
in order. 
8. In all the above cases, planets leading and following must be noted as the planet ahead 
will pass on its karakatwa matters to the planet behind. 
9. Planets posited in 2nd sign and 12th sign are considered. The planet in 2nd sign indicates 
the next step in action and the 1 ih indicate the background under which the matter 
is progressed. A planet in 2nd transfers it's gaining or losing, success or failure, and 
unification or diversification of matters pertaining to its karakatwa to the planet in 
question and the planet in 1ih will indicate supporting or opposing factors to the 
signification of the planet under study. If the planet under study is an enemy to planet 
in 1ih, a friendly planet in 2nd to the concern planet will fail to give good effects. 
If the planet in 2nd is an enemy to planet in 1ih the results will be worst. If both the 
planets in 2nd or 1ih are friendly to concerned planet the results will be excellent. 
90 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
10. Planets posited in signs successively one after the other, is called grahamalika (chain 
positions). In grahamalika all the planets are to be considered for combination to any 
selected planet. A planet hemmed between two enemies will create problem to the 
significations indicated by the planet in the middle. The Hemming can be in the same 
sign or from front and back signs. Most important: The hemming effect may also 
occur by directional influence of planets on the vacant signs causing hindrance to the 
movement of planet. We give an example to show this effect. 
Example 9 
\ 
Rah + 
Sat\ 
Ven \ \ 
Jup® ,-
Mer ~ , 
Sun 
1\ 
, 
1\ 
, , 
Moo , , , , , , , . 
Ke~,,,,' .\ 
Mar 
Venus and Mercury are in Aquarius and the next sign Pisces is empty. Being in the 
same direction, Ketu and Mars influence the sign Pisces. Sun & Moon as enemies 
posited behind Venus & Mercury. This combination indicates Venus & Mercury are 
hemmed between the influences of Ketu - Mars and Sun - Moon. Jupiter by retro goes 
to Gemini having Rahu in rear sign. Since he has left the position of Cancer by retro, 
that place is influenced by Ketu & Mars. Therefore, Jupiter is hemmed between Rahu-
Saturn and Ketu-Mars making Jupiter (native) immobile. 
11. Planet in ih sign to any planet will modify the karakatwa of that planet in 
consideration and this modification comes from external influence. 
12. Planets posited in trine (i.e. 5th and gth sign) to each other is considered as one group 
or in one direction. 
13. Planets in same direction is called the yoga phala (combination results) of certain 
matter under consideration which is subject to modifications by karakatwa gained 
through planet in 2nd and supported by karakatwa of planet in the background 12th 
and external modification by planet in ih. The quality and quantum of such 
modifications are to be decided again by yoga phala considering the planets in trine 
to the places 2nd, 12th and ih position. 
Rules of Navagraha Naadi 91 
14. The above positional rules can easily be studied by dividing the zodiac into four 
directions, i.e. North, East, South, West. Commencing from Pisces to Gemini 
. clockwise repeating the sequence till Aquarius. 
Example 10 
North East South 
1 2 3 
West 
4 Direction 
of signs 
South 
3 
East North West 
2 1 4 
West 
4 
North 
1 
East 
2 
South 
3 
North 
Wef#. East 
Directional 
Chart 
South 
Write the planets posited in respective 
direction degree wise in each sign. 
15. A retrograde planet will have its influence on the previous sign if the placement in 
a particular sign is not due to retrogression from the sign ahead. For example if 
Jupiter while retrograde in Gemini has crossed it in reverse and reached sign Taurus, 
it need not again be accounted for from Aries. However, at the time of epoch, if 
Jupiter is retrograde and is still in Gemini, it needs to be accounted for from Taurus 
16. But when such retro planet is under an influence of Rahu or Ketu who are by nature 
travel in retro motion, then the said retro planet will not have effect on previous 
sign. 
Example: If Venus is retro in Libra at 14 degrees, it should influence Virgo. But if Rahu 
is there at 14 degrees or less, then Venus will not have influence on Virgo or if Rahu is 
more than 14 Degrees in Virgo then also Venus will not have influence on Virgo. 
17. When a planet is retro, we have to cast two sets of directional combination chart, 
one taking the planet from its original place and the other from previous sign being 
its retro position. For each retro planet we need to cast similar directional chart for 
analysis. (subject to condition in rule 15) 
18. Except where Saturn is connected to a retro planet, the karakatwa of retro planet 
will be experienced in the later part of the life. If Saturn is connected, the retro effect 
will be felt in the first part of life and the direct effect will be in the later part of 
the life unless Jupiter is involved in combination. Participation of Jupiter will reverse 
the rule. But if Jupiter is retro, the effects will be felt in 1st and 2nd part of the 
life with modification of planets at the time of transit. Suppose Saturn is linked to 
92 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Venus directly and by retro if it is linking Sun. Saturn will give signification of Sun 
like success or position in profession. This will be the first part. After this event, 
Saturn will give Marriage, which will be 2nd part. The age factor is to be considered 
based on the nature of event. In Case of Jupiter the effect will be reverse, first part 
will indicate the incident of marriage, and the 2nd part will be professional success. 
19. An exalted planet indicates the strength of its characteristic. For example in a male 
horoscope, Venus in exaltation in Pisces indicates the wife of the male native is 
capable of being affluent and dominates the native. The native himself may involve 
in preaching higher or metaphysical knowledge. However, it does promise riches to 
native. He will be comfortable with metaphysical attainments. 
20. A Planet debilitated indicates the hardship in the characteristics of planet and the 
hardship to the jeevakaraka represented by that planet. 
21. The planetary exchange, i.e. the inter change in the placement of two sign lords has 
an important role in Naadi. For example, lord of Aries, Mars in Sagittarius and Lord 
of Sagittarius, Jupiter in Aries. We need to cast two directional charts, one 
considering Mars in Sagittarius and Jupiter in Aries and the next one considering Mars 
in Aries and Jupiter in Sagittarius. Similarly for all such exchanged planets we need 
to draw the directional charts. Saturn effect should be considered as explained in the 
rule for retrograde Saturn. 
22. The planets are grouped as Jeeva karaka Jupiter, Karma Karaka Saturn, Destiny 
Makers Sun, Mercury, and Venus. 
23. Destiny Modifiers ft Breakers are egoistic Mars, mental oriented planets Moon Et 
Rahu and Ketu. 
24. But these destiny modifiers fit breakers have some useful karakatwa which they will 
extend if they are placed in the signs of destiny makers or influenced by destiny 
makers. 
All planets represent as jeevakaraka. 
25. Sun represents Father and Son. 
Moon represent, Mother, Daughter. 
Mars represent Husband and Brother. 
Mercury represent younger Brother or Sister. 
Jupiter represent as male Native 
Venus represent as Wife, Female native, Daughter and Daughter in law. 
Saturn represent as elder Brother. 
Rahu represent paternal Grand Parents. 
Ketu represent maternal Grand Parents. 
26. Karma karaka is Saturn for all. 
Rules ofNavagraha Naadi 93 
27. When Sun is being studied as father, the Sun's affluence factor is assigned to Jupiter 
and the planet posited in Leo, When Mercury as sibling is studied, the Jupiter is 
considered as affluence factors of Mercury. Similarly Venus when considered as wife, 
the affluence factor of Venus is studied through Jupiter and the planet in Venus sign. 
28. Jupiter represents as universal Jeeva without gender classification as it is not 
cognisable physically. Its abode can in a male or female embodiment, which is 
represented by Mars and Venus respectively. 
29. The purpose of Jeeva is to get liberated from material bondage and get Mukti 
(salvation). Therefore close conjunction of Bogha (pleasure) planet Venus in natal 
chart does not ensure enjoyment of Bogha of nonliving matters by Jeeva as the 
purpose of these two planets are different. But if they are placed in other places like 
ih, 51h, gth 2"d or 12th to each other then the Jeeva in transit gets these Bogha. 
30. Due to two different qualities of Jupiter and Venus they are considered as enemies 
to each other when placed together. Similarly Saturn is Karma and the Sun is Atma. 
Atma does not want any Karma to be attached. Sun and Saturn mythologically 
represent Father and Son. In view of different qualities there will be difference of 
opinion among Father and Son. This applies to profession also where there will be 
difference of opinion with the superiors in work place, but it will not deter to give 
due recognition (being a nonliving matter). 
Note :Sri S. K. Mehta in his book "New Dimensions in Hindu Astrology" mentions about the natural 
benefic not supporting "nonliving matters" and natural malefic not supporting "living matters". 
31 . Therefore, with in the destiny maker's group subtle enmity exists among Jupiter-
Venus and Saturn-Sun which needs to be considered while judging. 
32. Rahu is called Kalapurusha that is death and danger inflicting planet to all Jeeva 
karakas and also indicates erratic nature. Ketu is a planet of obstruction and 
dejection to all jeevakaraka. Female natives represented by planets if associated with 
Ketu, will indicate wealth hoarding nature of females. But the same combination in 
a male chart will indicate dispute, blocking of wealth relating to the signification of 
these planets. 
33. If Rahu afflicts Moon, it disturbs the mental faculties of Jeeva karaka (Jupiter). On 
Mars it suppresses the dashing nature of Jupiter. If Ketu afflicts Moon the native will 
have mental dejections. If Ketu afflicts Mars then there will be stubbornness to native. 
34. With the above subtle rules, the affluent planets, Sun, Mercury, Venus will provide 
comfort levels in two different ways to the native. 
35. Sun, Mercury, Venus if linked to Jupiter in directional chart, then the native is destined 
to seek this affluence by his self efforts. If they are linked to Saturn the affluence 
are supported by previous karma. 
94 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
36. The participation of destiny modifiers 8t breakers in between Jupiter and the 
affluence planets will create the problems and modifications in achieving the 
affluence of these planets which needs to be pacified by remedies to the destiny 
breakers. 
37. The participation of destiny modifiers 6t breakers in between Saturn and the affluence 
planets will create the problem in getting this affluence and unless there is link to 
Jupiter, no remedies can pacify the destiny modifiers a breakers. 
38. The combinations formed by directional charts indicate the yogaphala in the birth 
charts. 
39. Combust: Any planet within the same quarter of a star with the Sun is said to be 
combust, such planet will lose its strength and Sun will gain the power. The 
signification of the planet will go to the living signification of Sun but it will not be 
useful for the native. 
40. Exchange : Two planets situated in each other's sign are called exchange of planets. 
In exchange of planets there are two types. 1. When only two planets posited in 
mutual signs it is a simple exchange of planets. 2. One or more planets involved with 
these planets. Then the planet involved is called the prompting planet. This is called 
prompted exchange. 
Example Simple exchange: Sun in Aquarius, Saturn in Leo. 
Example prompted exchange: Sun and Mars in Aquarius, Saturn in Leo. Mars is a 
prompting planet. 
41. Planet in War : A Planet posited with in the same star with Mars is said to be in War 
with Mars. If the Planet is behind Mars, Mars gains strength and gives its effect to 
the planet behind. if the planet is ahead of Mars then the planet wins the war in giving 
its effect to the Mars. The luminaries conjunct with Mars does not wage war with 
Mars. 
42. Ayanamsha : The subject of Ayanamsha is most complicated, and a debatable issue 
unresolved so far. Less we discuss about its technicalities better it would be for our 
subject. However to show the existing varied opinion of the scholars who established 
their point of view towards the year of coincidence of the fixed and movable zodiac, 
a list is furnished below: 
1 Cheerio 388 BC 
2 D. Davidson 317 BC 
3 G. Massey 255 BC 
4 Thierns 125 BC 
5 P. Councel OOOAD 
6 Sepharial 498 AD 
Rules of Navagraha Naadi 95 
7 C. Fagan 213 AD 
8 N.C. Lahari 285 AD 
9 K.S. Krishnamurthi 291 AD 
10 P.C. Roy 319 AD 
11 B.V. Raman 398 AD 
12 L.D. Swamikannu Pallai 532 AD 
13 Ebenezer Burgess 560 AD 
Beside the different views about the year of coincidence, the rate at which the drifting 
takes place also varies according to few of them. 
Surya Siddhanta 
Bhaskara II fit Manjula 
Newcomb 
B.V. Raman 
Lahari 
54 seconds per year 
59.9 seconds per year 
50.2388 seconds per year 
50.3333 seconds per year 
50.2741 Seconds per year 
Above all, there is one system which is called the "Vakya panchangam" mostly used in 
Tamil Nadu by Naadi astrologers:-rn all the above cases there will be different planetary 
positions, except that the difference in KP and Lahari is negligible. 
Tropical computed planetary positions claim to have given good results and the same is 
discussed in 2"d part of the book. However we recommend the following computation of 
charts to the readers. 
a. While studying the chart, the chart with Lahari Ayanamsha is found to be more nearer 
to accuracy and this is being vastly used in the conventional Indian astrology across 
the world. Similarly the transit chart for the timing of the event is to be cast based 
on lahari Ayanamsha. 
b. To have a horoscope cast without Ayanamsha (Tropical) on experimental basis for both 
natal and transit. 
43. True Nodes : There is again confusion, about the nodes whether to consider true 
nodes or mean node. In true node the movements of retro nodes turn direct for some 
time and then take their regular retro course. This is essential in Naadi astrology to 
know the effect of these nodes when they are direct and retro. As we take in the 
case of other planets the previous sign for retro planets, we need to consider the 
nodes a sign ahead when they are in direct motion. In many software this may not 
be reflected and we may need to take the help of an ephemeris. We give an example 
to show the effect of nodes when they are direct. 
96 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
~ 
Example: 11 Jup® 
Ket(D) 
( 
Rah Moo 
Female I 
Rah(D) 7/1211952 
Ket / Mar 
Ven 
~ 
1---
~ ----Mer® Sat 
Sun 
In the horoscope Rahu has crossed Mars and is direct and therefore, he should be 
considered in Aquarius. This makes him connected to Saturn. Similarly, Ketu is direct and 
he should be considered from Leo also. This makes him connected to Jupiter®. Jupiter 
retro goes to Pisces and connects to Sun and Mercury® where Mercury connects Saturn. 
Jupiter is connected to Saturn by his original position Aries. 
Mars is husband of the native, in the house of Saturn with Venus the luxurious planet and 
Rahu a secret planet is with Mars. These planets are having fraudulent planet Moon in 
7th sign Cancer. Rahu being in direct motion goes to Aquarius and links Saturn in Libra. 
Next to Saturn Mercury is in Scorpio and by retro motion Mercury joins Saturn. 
Mars = husband, Rahu = secret, Saturn =workplace, Mercury+ Moon =thievish tendency. 
Mercury = writing, Mercury in Scorpio sign = machinery, Ketu = print media. 
Summary : Husband secretly stolen the typewriting machine at workplace. 
Jupiter in Mars house Aries links to Ketu direct motion in Leo. Jupiter has Saturn in 7th 
where Mercury joins Saturn. Jupiter by retro goes to Pisces and joins Ketu and Moon in 
Cancer. 
Summary : Jupiter is another person engaged in secondhand goods trading. Who 
purchased the typewriter from the husband. 
Sun as an authority in the Scorpio who has come to know this arrested the husband. Rahu 
by direct motion goes to Aquarius and Ketu by direct motion comes to Leo and from there 
cast the blocking influence on Sagittarius. By this Mars the husband is hemmed between 
Rahu and Ketu without movement indicating arrest. Jupiter when moves to Taurus casts 
his good effect on Mars. The Husband was released. When Ketu moved to Gemini resuming 
his retro motion and Ketu linked to Saturn in Libra which had resulted in loosing the job 
for the husband. 
Rules ofNavagraha Naadi 97 
If Rahu were not direct, the results would have been different. The husband would have 
been a weak person, and the wife would have committed adultery etc., Therefore, it 
is essential to consider true positions of nodes. 
44. The destiny breakers can encounter the Jeeva and Karma planet from any position 
as per directional relationship of Naadi. 
Other Essentials of Birth Chart Analysis 
45. The day lord of the year according to religious calendar followed at the birth place 
of the native is to be noted. For example Ugadi is the beginning of New Year in Andhra 
Pradesh, Karnataka. The week day of the beginning of Ugadi is considered as year 
lord. The week day on which the birth month begins becomes the month lord of birth 
and the week day on which the birth took place becomes the day lord of the birth. 
The hour in which the birth took place becomes the hora Lord of birth. 8:34 minutes 
in that hour is the span of a sub-hora Lord of the birth time. 
These components will help to differentiate the life orientations of births which took 
place on same date. 
The position of these lords in the birth chart will indicate the overall view of the life 
orientation of the person. 
Note: In Chapter 2 of Acharya Varaha Mihira's "Brihat Jataka" there is a mention of dignities of 
planets as stated in rule 45. We have adopted the principles with necessary modification in Naadi 
system to differentiate the births of same date. Our experiments yielded amazing results. The 
findings and application of above rules are discussed in the book "Celestial Matrix" with example 
horoscopes. 
46. In a horary chart drawn at the time of consultation by noting the position of the hera-
lord and sub-hora lord, the purpose and present condition of the consultant can be 
known. 
47. The superimposition of this hora-chart on birth chart will indicate the events that 
would take place at the present moment and the future events can be foretold moving 
Jupiter, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu on natal chart. 
48. The movement of Sun who is the main affluent planet will indicate the month in which 
the results wi II fructify. 
Observations to be made at the time of consultation 
49. Every consultant will appear before a Naadi astrologer when he is directed by the 
almighty through the direction of planets. 
50. He brings along with him the influence of signification of planets identifiable in many 
ways by studying 
a) his dress colours and link them to planets 
b) his sitting direction and link them to planet 
98 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
c) prominent articles associated with him and relate them to planets. 
d) the person accompanying the consultant and the articles associated with 
him. 
e) his sitting position and the direction. 
f) the entry of any other person in to the consulting room. 
g) the sounds, you hear at that moment and try to link to planets. 
h) telephone calls received by you, by consultant or the person accompanying him. 
i) the matter of the call, the gender of the caller, link them to planets. 
j) articles presented to you by the consultant when he entered. 
k) Carefully watch, while he gives the inputs you need. Does he give the inputs 
without any obstruction or will he get confused in giving details of his birth or 
any other data you asked for. If he is providing his chart, note the condition of 
the chart. If he is giving a well organised and neat chart things are organised 
in his I if e. If the chart is mutilated then he is facing problems. If he scribbles 
on a short paper then and there, then due to haste he is facing problem. If it 
is a white paper and small it is financial problem. If it is big white paper, he is 
expecting amounts. If the paper has some scribbling letters, then it is due to 
business transactions. If it has numbers scribbled on it, it denotes debts and 
financial pressure. These are general guidelines but in practice they may signify 
differently to the astrologer at the time of consultation. Every bit of information 
that comes at that moment is to be linked to planet. 
l) Watch his face, study the prominent planets appearing on his face. 
m) Take a right hand palm print of the consultant and note the lines and ridges. Study 
the palm as per Naadi system and compare them with indications observed in 
the birth chart. 
Many such clues are explained in the Book "Celestial Matrix" and "Prediction Secrets Naadi 
Astrology". Books are available with Sagar Publications, 
Chapter 14 
PLANETS AND MATTERS OF LIFE 
The fundamental rule is to select the planet based on the matter to be studied and then 
from that planet we should consider the positions of other planets in 1, 5, 9, 2, 12, 7. 
Character & Health Matters 
Planet to study JUPITER for Male 
Locate Jupiter in the Chart and note the sign. Note the Planets posited with Jupiter 
in the same Pada, Nakshatra, Sign. Note the Planet in 2'd, 51h, fh, '7\ 12h to Jupiter. 
Don't forget to merge Rashi Karakatwa and relate the nature to character. 
(Don't bother about house divisions as prescribed in conventional astrology only signs are to be 
considered. For this purpose an easy method of directional chart is explained which will take care of 
these positions.) 
Now read the matters related to character (Guna) and disease (Roga) columns from the 
karakatwa list of the planets noted. 
Example 12 
NESW 
Sat®-18 
\ 
\ 
M~r-5 Mer®-0.55 
Rall-9 Sun-17 
\ 
\ 
' \ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
Male 
31 /05'1.1930 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
' \ 
\ 
Ket-9 \ 
\ 
\ 
~--
Jup-1 
Ven-15 
Moo-8.5 
Most of the planets are in visible half. The affluence planet Venus, Sun and Mercury are 
predominantly posited in this half. The affluence for this native is destined by previous 
karma. The profession planet is in the invisible half, which the native has to choose. Saturn 
is in Jeeva karaka house (Sagittarius) and is linked to Rahu and Mars in 51h sign Aries. 
Maya Deha karma (illusionary body) is the profession. Saturn by retro goes to Scorpio 
where in he gets the link of Moon in Cancer an arts planet, Venus in Gemini another arts 
100 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
planet, Sun and Mercury in Taurus indicating success and intelligence. Mercury also by retro 
joins Mars and Rahu. Sun (light), Rahu (shadow), illusionary body+ light & shadow+ arts 
= He is a Cinema actor. Aries is a hot and dry place. Rahu and Mars in Aries also indicate 
violence. Most of his pictures were based on these themes only. 
The directional chart is drawn below: 
North 
Moo Sat® 
West East 
Jup Mar 
Yen Rah 
Ket Sat® 
South 
Mer® 
Sun 
Consider Jupiter for Character and health: 
First Rashi Position: 
Jupiter is in Gemini - Rashi Karakatwa is communicative. 
The Native is a good orator. 
Next consider the planet with Jupiter. 
Venus is with Jupiter. 
Venus is Luxurious and Artistic. 
Native is Luxurious and Artistic. 
After Venus there is Ketu from Venus sign Libra. 
Mer® 
Saturn from Sagittarius being a house of Jupiter connected with religious matters and 
Ketu also represents religious matter and serving people. After achieving the affluence 
of Venus the native turns towards service to society. 
The native is engaged in the social activities. 
Health Matters 
The Jupiter is in Mercury house afflicted by Ketu and Mercury retro is in the Venus house 
with Sun. Therefore, the effect of Venus will not be there and the Sun effect will be there 
on Jupiter. Sun is a fiery planet, and the Mercury represent Skin and goes to Mars house 
another fiery sign and meets Rahu and Mars there. Rahu is shadow, Sun is light and Mars 
is heat. The native will have skin problems and red marks on skin, particularly, on the 
face because it is in the sign of Taurus. 
Planets and Matters of Life 
For Female 
Character & Health Matters 
Planet to study VENUS 
101 
Group the planets posited in the same pada of Nakshatra fit Rashi, in 5th sign to Venus, 
gth Sign to Venus, ih Sign to Venus and 2"d to Venus and 12th to Venus 
Example: 13 
Jup-13® 
Rah-15 Moo-8 
Female 
23/10/1951 Ket-15 
Mar-18 
Ven-21 
Sun-6 Sat-15 
Mer-12 
tmm 
In this chart also most of the planets are in the visible half and the story of this lady is 
based on her previous karma. In the invisible half only Rahu and Jupiter are there, which 
leads to Jeeva karaka to dangers and unethical deeds. 
Directional chart: 
North 
Jup:ID 
IVkxJ 
wes. East 
Jup® Rctl Ket 
&11 000 Mar 
Mer Ven 
South 
Sat 
Venus is in Leo - Proud and authoritative 
Venus is with Mars - Anger and egoistic character 
Ketu is also in that sign which has left both Venus and Mars 
Ketu and Mars are just close to each other: Stubborn and obstructive 
102 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Jupiter is in Pisces, and has Moon in the same direction and Moon having Ketu and Mars 
in next sign. Saturn is in ylh to Jupiter. For Venus also Saturn is in 2nd. 
This woman has a very complicated nature: 
She is basically, a stubborn woman with proud and ego. Jupiter being an adviser fit friend 
by retro comes to a house of Karma gets Rahu (secretive planet) and links Saturn. This 
indicates that Jupiter has secretly introduced another friend to Venus (the native). This 
Jupiter has become unethical (Rahu) and adultery (Moon) in nature and with that intention 
he has introduced this Saturn who is in the Mercury house being 2nd to Venus has become 
friend to Venus. This Saturn has 2nd to it, a debilitated Sun representing a low level 
influential person who has many friends of anti social elements (debilitated Sun + Mercury 
friend + Rahu indicates unethical and also many in numbers.). 
Venus has left Mars the husband, and is exchanged with debilitated Sun and goes to 
Mercury in the house of Venus which is a market place. Venus has entered into this place 
with support of Jupiter and Saturn. She has lost the Atma Sanmana (self respect) due 
to Sun's debilitation. 
This lady has lost her character and started involving unethical secret relationships with 
many people for the sake of Money. 
Because of this she has to lose her husband who has become dejected and taken up Sanyasa 
(renunciation) and left home. 
Venus is connected with Mars and Ketu, indicating injuries and growth. Moon indicates 
blood (Mars+Ketu having Moon in 1 i\ Rahu indicates impurity of blood due to contacts 
with many people. By exchange the Venus goes to Libra, which represents below the belt 
portions. She had several infectious diseases and had ultimately become the victim of HIV 
positive and lost her life during 1989. 
All other female significations like daughter etc., represented by Venus are to be studied 
as explained in the above example. 
Planets and Matters of Life 
EDUCATION, )Ro YOUNGER SIBUNG 
PLANET-MERCURY 
103 
(Other matters of Mercury Lover or Friend, Maternal Uncle, Father in law and as 
affluence it indicates Land) 
Example 14 
Younger Brother or Sister 
Character St Health Matters of younger sibling 
Rah-29 
. Moo-1 
Female 
10/01/1982 
Ven®-13.27 
Mer-13.14 
Ket-29 
Sun-26 Jup-14 Mar-17 
Sat-28 
In the visible half almost all the planets are posited. It indicates most of the happenings 
are due to past karma. In the invisible half Rahu and Moon are posited. The efforts are 
due to Maya (illusions) and Mind. (Moon is one degree and Rahu has just left Cancer. Both 
are in the same Nakshatra.) Therefore, the native will be subjected to many incidents 
which are beyond her planning or expectations due to her own mental conditions. 
Directional chart North 
Moo-1 
weg_ East 
Rah-29 Ket-29 
Jup-14 Ven® 
Sun-26 
South 
Mar-17 
Sat-28 
Mer-13.14 
Ven-13.27 
Younger Sister of Native 
Mercury is younger sister to Venus (the native) 
Mercury is with Saturn and Mars. She is lazy and short tempered. Moon is in opposition. 
104 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Since Moon is connected to Rahu she is eccentric. Mars signify husband, who is posited 
in Virgo along with enemy Saturn. The other sign Gemini is occupied by Rahu an enemy 
to Mercury. Mercury himself is under the spell of Rahu being a dispositer. Mercury is in 
Capricorn, which is the debilitated sign of Mars. Ketu is in Sagittarius which is in between 
Capricorn and Virgo. This indicates a disturbed married life. Since there is Jupiter in Venus 
house Libra, in between Mars and Mercury, the native's sister though having disturbed 
life will not get separated. 
Education of younger sister (See Example 14) 
Mercury is with Venus, who is retro, and goes to Ketu and Sun, indicating higher studies 
are related to serving people and medicine. Mercury is having Saturn connection, the 
profession also relates to same. There will be obstructions due to Mars, Ketu and delay 
due to Saturn. The retro Venus helps her, that is the native helps her sister in education. 
Mars indicates weapons (surgery). 
Rahu and Moon connection makes her to visit abroad. 
She did her fv1!3BC3 course and then applied for higher course in dermatology and plastic 
surgery. This is due to involvement of Rahu from Mercury house, Saturn in Mercury house 
Mars in Mercury house and the Moon linking Venus and Mercury. Mercury (the skin), Moon 
(change), Venus (beauty), Mars (surgery). 
(Note: in prediction, we could only say that she would do her higher studies relating techno 
medical relating to skin or allergies in foreign country.) The detailed analysis given above 
is after her telephonic information. 
Landed property to Native: 
Land indicated by Mercury: 
The Venus who is retrograde is going away from a land significator Mercury. The Mercury 
is land and is linked to Moon indicating loss of land to native. Since Venus is going to Jupiter 
house it becomes money which is being blocked by Ketu. Sun indicates father. The money 
goes to father. Mercury is 2"d to Sun and Rahu is linked to Mercury representing foreign 
studies to younger sister. 
This native has sold a land and given the money to father for younger sister's education 
as stated above. Mercury in the Saturn house indicates the land to native gained through 
work which is also being linked by Saturn from Mercury house. 
(In prediction, we could only say that the native will lose her landed property due to her 
younger sister. Later she confirmed the sale of land) 
Similarly for all matters of Mercury we have to consider the planets combination and then 
predict. 
Planets and Matters of Life 105 
(Note: When Mercury is considered as education planet, then the Jupiter will take over the other 
karakatwa like, intelligence etc of Mercury.) 
Profession of the Native (See Example 14) 
SAlURN represents Karma - Profession 
Native is Venus who is in the house of Saturn and Venus by retro goes to Ketu and Sun. 
Saturn is in the debilitated house of Venus having Mars with him. Mars is harassment, 
Ketu is quitting, who is linked to Saturn 1) through retro Venus 2) Mercury being dispositor 
of Saturn and Mars. This indicates that the native's job profile is not satisfactory. She 
has to quit the job for the sake of her younger sister to accumulate money. Saturn in 
Mercury house indicates commerce and accounting, and in the other sign of Mercury, in 
Gemini, Rahu is posited, which indicates light and shadow, having Moon connection. She 
was working in a MNC, in computer accounting. She had visited foreign countries. But 
ironically this company was engaged in the business of medical equipments manufacturing 
and selling. The sign of Mercury helped the sister to get education in medical line. The 
same being a debilitated sign to Venus has changed the course of profession to the native. 
Combination being same, the essential sign dignities of planets and their relation to a 
particular matter has to be carefully considered for different results of native and 
respective relatives involved in the combination. 
Saturn also represents elder brother to be studied as explained above. 
(But in the above example Saturn is in a sign where Venus gets debilitated and also with 
enemy Mars (who also represents brotherly relationship) having influence of Rahu through 
Gemini. Therefore, the native is deprived of brothers) 
Example 15 
Wife - Venus 
Rah-26 
Jup-11 
Sat®-26 
Male 
1/11/1972 
Asc-15 
Mer-8 Sun-15 
Ket-26 
Moo-20 
Ven-8 
Mar-27 
Venus is in its debilitated sign and it is with Mars. Mars is in its enemy sign and aspected 
by Saturn. Venus is hemmed between Sun and Moon who are enemies to Venus. 
106 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
The wife hails from a troubled family and she also struggles lot in her life. She has technical 
line of education. Mercury is in Mars house linked by Saturn. This indicates though there 
will be delay in education she will be successful in education as Mercury is hemmed between 
Sun, Jupiter and Rahu. Rahu is in Jupiter's house and does not harm education but gives 
shadow related subject. Rahu having Moon in Leo represents arts. Therefore education 
should relate to technical and art subject. She did her interior decoration course apart 
from architect course. 
Character analysis : She has surpassed blemish circumstances having moved with male 
friends (Moon+Rahu+Jupiter). 
Mercury in Scorpio, Venus and Mars in Virgo are linked to Saturn. By retro Saturn goes 
to Aries and establishes his link to Sun. The Sun is having Ketu in Gemini and in 2"d 
Mercury. This indicates involvement in a love affair in the working environment. 
Carefully planned affair turned into marriage. The person involved is an intelligent 
technical person who will have bright future due to combination of Mars, Venus in Virgo 
linking to Saturn, Sun, Mercury followed by Jupiter and the abundance planet Rahu. 
Example 16 
Finance - Venus Moo-2 Ket-25 
Male 
28/10/1955 
Rah-25 Sun-11 
Ven-26 
Sat-28 
~'1.11iiiP'4.•J 
Jup-4 
Mar-16 
Mer-22 
In the visible half there is only Moon and Ketu which tells by karma the mind turns 
philosophical but it is in the later part of the life as the invisible half has lot more to do 
by Jeeva karaka Jupiter and Karma karaka Saturn who is in an exalted position. Saturn 
is connected to Venus and Sun (by which the debilitation effect of Sun is lost). Both Jupiter 
and Saturn have connection to affluence planets, Mercury in exaltation having Saturn, 
Venus and Sun in 2"d. Jeeva karaka (Jupiter) from the house of Sun, transfers his effects 
to Sun being the dispositor to Sun and joins them through high power of intelligence 
(Jupiter, Mars and Mercury). 
Planets and Matters of Life 107 
Directional Chart North 
Moo 
Rah 
West East 
Sun Jup 
Ven 
Sat 
South 
Ket 
Mar 
Mer 
Jupiter, Sun, Venus, Mercury and Saturn combination has given the native a great yoga. 
The presence of Mercury in his exalted sign has utilised Ketu for analytical values along 
with Mars a technical planet. Moon from Jupiter house and Ketu from Venus house have 
made changes or obstructions to a positive side. Moon mental faculties, Rahu in Mars 
house, approaching Saturn, Venus and Sun have given him the global technical affluence 
with fame. 
Leading a most luxurious and lavish life with richness the native has turned his life towards 
serving society and become a philanthropist in the later part of life due to Moon and Ketu 
driving his past karma from visible half. 
Example 17 
House - Venus 
Rah 
Jup 
Ven Mer 
Moo 
Male 
15/6/1950 
Sun 
Sat 
Mar 
Ket 
Directional chart 
North 
Rah 
West East 
Sun Ven 
Jup Sat 
South 
Mer 
Moo 
Mar 
Ket 
The association of Venus with Saturn have link to Jupiter who has Rahu situated in Jupiter 
house and is 2nd to Jupiter which has given a very beautiful and big house. (Rahu from 
Jupiter house is most important as it indicates the big, vast etc.). By Karma i.e. Saturn 
is linked to the entire affluent planet, Venus who has Mercury fit Moon in 2nd followed by 
Sun in 3'd and Jupiter linking Sun. Both Jeeva and Karma are linked to the affluent planets. 
108 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Mars and Ketu from the exalted place of Mercury links Mercury in the house of Venus -
Taurus where the Moon is exalted will give a serious stubborn and concentrated attitude 
towards business. 
Example 18 
Vehicles - Venus 
Ket 
__.,...-
Ve~ .. ~ v---
.. 
... Mqte 
26!."1'/1956 . ·. 
Mer® Sat 
Sun Mar 
Rah 
Directional chart 
Moo 
~ 
North 
Sat Jup 
Mar Mer 
Rah 
West East 
+ 
I 
Moo Jup® 
Yen Mer® 
Sun 
Jup® 
South 
Ket 
Saturn, Mars and Rahu are linked to retrograde Mercury and Sun. Jupiter is in Leo and 
it links Mercury and Sun in Sagittarius and Venus in Aquarius. By retrograde Jupiter goes 
to Cancer and establishes connection with Saturn, Mars and Rahu. There is an exchange 
of Sun and Jupiter. Sun goes to Leo and links to Venus. Jupiter from Sagittarius links 
to Moon. The planet Venus signifying Vehicle is connected to changing planet Moon, 
Jupiter a Sun who are again linked to Saturn and Rahu. It is the artistic planet Moon 
with Jupiter connection indicates beauty of the Vehicle and the Sun's link indicates the 
royal status of the Vehicle. The link of Rahu Mars, Moon indicate changing of many luxury 
Vehicles. 
Example 19 
Husband - Mars 
Ket-8 
Female 
Z0/06/1978 
7-ZO am 
Moo-Z4 
Asc-Z6 
Sun-5 
Mer-1Z 
Jup-19 
Ven-11 
Sat-3 
Mar-10 
Rah-8 
Planets and Matters of Life 109 
Mars is in Leo with an enemy planet Saturn and Saturn is also in enemy house Leo. Husband 
will be lazy. Saturn as a professional planet does not have any connection in 5th, gth and 
ih. Saturn is blocked by Mars and Rahu. However, Venus in 12th, Sun, Mercury, and Jupiter 
in 11th to Saturn is a saving factor for husband represented by Mars. Sun being the 
dispositor of Saturn and Mars, posited in Gemini linking Jupiter and Mercury, has given 
him the job in police department. Because of this weak link to affluent planets his 
professional life is not progressive. Venus is in the liquid sign cancer influenced by 
debilitated Moon. This combination indicates low-level enjoyment relating to liquid. Saturn 
being enemy to Mars placed behind Mars will make husband represented by Mars weak. 
From the next sign, Virgo Rahu is approaching the weak husband represented by Mars. 
Mars indicating husband is hemmed between liquid, low-level enjoyment from rear sign 
and intoxication from sign ahead. He starts his day with drink and ends the day with booze. 
He is also very irritant by nature due to debilitated Moon in Mars house which effects his 
mental condition to lower level of enjoyments. The combination of Ketu Venus, Saturn 
Moon and Rahu connections rendered marital discard. 
There are number of other examples given in the Yoga chapter. We shall therefore, 
conclude this chapter by listing out living matters attached to planet which needs to be 
studied on the basis of examples given above. 
Study Mars for 
Study Sun for 
Study Sun for 
Study Moon 
Study Moon 
Study Moon 
Study Rahu 
Study Ketu 
Note: 
Younger brother for any native 
Father 
Son 
for Mother 
for Daughter 
for Mother in law 
Paternal side elders 
Maternal side elders 
Youngest sibling is represented by Mercury. Mercury with female influence will be youngest daughter 
and with male influence will be youngest son. 
Venus and Moon represent daughters. Elder or younger has to be decided upon the position of these 
planets in relation to Jupiter. Planet ahead of Jupiter indicates younger and behind indicates elder. 
This also applies to siblings. 
Chapter 15 
YOGA PHALA FROM COMBINATION OF 
PLANETS IN CHART 
The example horoscopes were given to participants at workshop and classroom without 
disclosing the case history to them. Most of the participants have excellently touched the 
exact points and few of them have used their best analytical skills. We have included all 
those points along with our analysis of charts illustrated in this chapter. 
Life span means the time limit extended to Jeeva in the body to do the karma as allotted 
to thisjanma (birth) to clear the previous deeds. Once the karma ends, the Jeeva (Jupiter) 
is swallowed by Kalapurusha (Rahu). 
Therefore, to analyse longevity, Rahu, Jupiter, Saturn, Ketu are studied. The distance 
between approaching Rahu to Jupiter and the linking of Ketu to Saturn will indicate the 
longevity. 
Longevity: 
If there is karma balance, and if Jupiter is closely related to Rahu, it only indicates the jeeva 
sankata yoga (diseased or troubled life), If Rahu is afflicting Saturn, it indicate karma 
sankata yoga (Professional hazards). If Ketu is approaching Jupiter, it is jeeva bandana (Self 
blocking or arrest) or mukti marga yoga (Path of salvation). If Ketu is approaching Saturn 
it is karma bandana (Blocking of karma), or mukti karma yoga (Metaphysical work). When 
Mars is approached by Rahu it is the maya deha (illusion- body), or chaya deha (shadow-
body) yoga. Such persons are not the same as they appear. 
The end of life comes when Jeeva (Jupiter) is under the spell of Kalapurusha (Rahu), Karma 
(Saturn) getting the Mukti (Ketu), and the Deha (Mars) turns into ash. 
Subject to above the life span is judged on the following lines: 
1 The close contact of approaching Rahu with Jupiter in a natal chart indicates danger 
to the life. 
2 Simultaneously if approaching Ketu is also close to Saturn. It indicates serious case and 
may indicate short life. 
3 Links of transit Jupiter to natal Rahu, natal Jupiter to transit Rahu simultaneously, 
transit Saturn to natal Ketu, natal Saturn to transit Ketu, either directly or through other 
planets or by exchange is most serious which may end the life. But the life comes to 
an end when both natal and transit Sun (Atma), Mars (Deha) fit Moon (Manah) are all 
related to above Saturn + Ketu 8t Jupiter + Rahu combination. 
4 If any planet, out of Venus, Mercury, Moon, Sun happens to be between Jupiter and Rahu 
or Ketu and Saturn, by placement or by trine or y!h placements, then there will be a 
lease of life. 
Yoga Phala from Combination of Planets in Chart 111 
5 If Jupiter is hemmed between Rahu fit Mars, Rahu fit Venus, Rahu fit Moon, or Ketu fit 
Mars, Ketu &Venus, Ketu fit Saturn , Ketu fit Mercury. It indicates the reduced longevity. 
6 If Jupiter is hemmed between Mars and Rahu, it indicates sudden or violent death. 
7 If Saturn is hemmed between Mars and Rahu, due to karma the death will be sudden. 
8 If similar combinations appear to other planets instead of Jupiter, then the life of 
particular relative represented by that planet will have such life endangering situations. 
Example 20 
We give below 
example horoscopes 
for Longevity. 
Longevity: Long lived 
Rah 
Psc 28 
Moo 
Mar 
Male 
7/9/1896 Jup-2 
Sun-17 ' Ket-2 'l 
Sat-22 
Ven-2 I 
Mer-11 
The Kala Purusha Rahu is in Aquarius and Jupiter is in Leo. There are number of planets 
between Rahu and Jupiter. There are two Planets between Ketu and Saturn. This indicates 
the long life and this great soul lived up to 71 years. 
Example 21 
Short Lived: 
Mer-12 
Ven-7 
Asc-2 
Sun-29 
6-Mar Ket-24 
Male 
12/1/1863 
Rah-24 Jup-4 Sat-14 
I 't Moo-18 
112 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
The Kala Purusha Rahu is in Scorpio approaching Jupiter in Libra. Jupiter is not having any 
planet with it. Only Mars links Jupiter and this Mars is again linked to Sun in Sagittarius. 
There is a trine conjunction of Ketu to Saturn. Span between Rahu and Jupiter, Ketu and 
Saturn is less. Therefore he is short lived. The native passed away at the age of 39. 
Not only the distance between Rahu and Jupiter, we should also consider the Ketu and 
Saturn simultaneously to assess the short life. 
Example 22 
Case of Rahu approaching Jupiter but Saturn supported by Planet: 
Sat® 19 
\ 
Asc 26 Jup-0.7+ 
Ket-10 
Male 
11/10/1942 Rah-10 -
Ven-15 
Moo-10 Mar-22 
Mer-23 
Sun-24 
Rahu is approaching Jupiter in Cancer but Saturn is having support of more number of 
planets in Virgo, indicating Karma pending. Therefore, though there is satisfactory long life, 
death like situations due to sickness are inevitable to this native. 
Example: 23 
Unexpected Death: 
Ket-4 
Male 
20/28/1944 
Sat-14 
Rah-4 
Sun-3 r.1l! 
Jup-11 ,46 
Moo-18 
Mer-28 
Mar-44 
Yoga Phala from Combination of Planets in Chart 113 
Jupiter is hemmed between Rahu and Mars. Not only Jupiter, Moon and Mercury also 
hemmed between Rahu and Mars. The native, his mother (Moon) and his younger brother 
(Mercury) all have faced sudden death . .. 
There are many more subtle matters to be studied in respect of longevity and death. Rahu 
is "Jeeva Sankata Karaka "(endangering life signification). Ketu is "Karma Mukti Karaka 
"(endo1karma). Apart from this, at the time of death, the Atma (soul} should merge with 
soul i.e. Sun must participate connecting the natal Sun. Deha (body) should merge with 
fire or earth for this transit and natal Mars should get connected. Manah (mind) should get 
merged with mind to complete the death process. This entire merger can be direct or 
through some other planets. The involvement of other planets indicate the nature of death. 
DISEASES 
In our Indian philosophy, the sacred texts declare that a person will get serious diseases 
due to his past karma. In Navagraha Naadi, the Karma indicating planet is Saturn. Therefore, 
whenever Saturn and Sun-trines are involved, the diseases are incurable by medications and 
treatments, but however, there is always possibility of divine intervention to protect the 
person from dangers. 
If Jupiter or Venus as jeevakaraka is involved, the diseases are curable though of serious 
nature. The chronic effects are to be attached if Saturn is connected from Moon-trines. 
The medical science in Indian culture is dignified as "Ayurveda". In Indian medical science, 
the diseases are identified by three basic elements. They are Vaata the gas, Pitta the bile, 
Kafathe phlegm. The three factors are again linked with other constituents such as Ushna 
or Agni 6 Sheetha or Jala which represent heat or fire and cold or water. These humors 
are attributed to planets as under. 
SlJ'J Bile, Heat Pita, Ushna 
1\100 Water Kafa, Sheetha 
ML\R Heat Bile Pitta, Ushna 
MER Air Vayu, Sheetha 
JUP Air Vayu, Ushna/Sheetha 
\fB\J Water - Semen Kafa fit Meha, Sheetha 
SA.T Air Vayu, Sheetha 
RAH Air and Fire Vayu - Pitta, Ushna 
KEf Bile Pitta, Sheetha 
114 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Rashi and their related humor to be considered along with planets 
Mesha Sat debilitated Bile (Pitta) 
Vrishabha Ket debilitated Cold 
Mithuna Gas 
Karaka Mar debilitated Cold (Kafa) 
Simha Bile 
Kanya Ven debilitated Gas 
Tula Cold 
Vrishchika Moo/Rah debilitated Bile 
Dhanush Gas 
Makara Jup debilitated Gas (Vaata) 
Kumbha Gas 
Meena Mer debilitated Gas 
Sun, Mars, Ketu, Rahu connected (as per Naadi 1, 5, 9, 2, 12, 7) to Jupiter, Venus (for female) 
or Saturn (for both) diseases will be related to Bile and Heat. 
If Water planets Moon and Venus are connected to Jupiter, Venus or Saturn, then it is Kafa 
Dosha - Cold related diseases. 
If Air Planets, Mercury, Jupiter, Saturn linked to Jupiter, Venus or Saturn, then it is Vayu 
related diseases. 
More than one planet of same humor connected as above, will indicate the seriousness of 
disease. 
Rahu will afflict the part indicated by a planet linked with it. 
Ketu link wi II indicate the growth and ulcer in the part of the body indicated by the planet. 
The Saturn link to a planet indicate malfunctioning in a body part indicated by that planet, 
provided that the other planet is weak being in enemy house or influenced by Rahu or Ketu. 
A planet hemmed between two enemies will indicate problems in health matters 
represented by that planet. 
Important: Jupiter is Jeevakaraka and all planets represent certain relatives as Jeeva 
karaka. In such cases their karakatwa will be attributed to Jupiter. In case of female Jupiter 
is replaced by Venus. The diseases being discussed will be indicated in general if the enemy 
planets are associated with Jeeva karakas. The seriousness of the disease is to be gauged 
by: 
a) Number of enemy planets afflicting Jeeva karakas 
Yoga Phala from Combination of Planets in Chart 115 
b) Such afflicting planets are in an enemy sign or in the sign of their debilitation or from 
the debilitated sign of Jeeva karakas 
c) The Jeeva karakas are themselves debilitated or in adverse signs. 
d) The humor, sign, Sun-trine or Moon-trine as explained earlier. 
Note: The diseases are of 3 types: 
1. That which cause suffering & immobility of body (Jupiter, (Mars) Venus) 
2. That which cause suffering St inability to perform (Saturn) 
3. That which cause suffering due to mental problems with or without inability or immobility (Moon) 
When any planet in the group mentioned above is afflicted by Rahu, Ketu, and/or enemy 
planets the type of suffering cited against that group will be predominant. Immobility is 
to be considered when any one of the planet mentioned above is hemmed between two 
or more enemy influences. 
Some of the diseases are discussed below with respective combinations and wherever 
possible example cases are illustrated by horoscopes. 
Bli~dness or Disease of Eyes 
Sun and Moon are Right and Left eyes respectively. 
1 Saturn connected to (Naadi 1, 5, 9, 2, 12, 7) Sun or Moon, Eye sight becomes weak 
2 Rahu or Ketu connected to Sun or Moon, defective eye sight. (Cataract, Colour 
blindness, Squint eyes etc.) 
3 If Saturn is linked to Rahu or Ketu and connected to Sun or Moon, blindness occurs. If 
this combination involves both Sun and Moon, both eyes will become blind. 
4 Especially if Rahu and Ketu are from the houses of Saturn, Moon and Sun then the 
blindness will be sure. 
Example- 24 
Blindness 
Mar-29 
Ket·18 
Sat-9 
Asc-27 
Moo-23 
Mer-19 
Ven-27 
Jup·18® 
Rah-18 
Male 
9/12/1608 
Became Blind 
Sun-29 
116 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Rahu from the Moon house connects to Sun in Scorpio. Ket along with Saturn from Capricorn 
connects to Moon in Sagittarius. Since Jupiter retro links both Sun and Moon, total blindness 
occurred in the later part of the life when there was connection of natal Rahu and transit 
Rahu, Natal Ketu and transit Ketu and natal Saturn and transit Saturn. This was during 1652. 
Example 25 
Visually impaired famous in music at young age: 
This is a horoscope of child musician who is blind but famous at the very young age. 
Rah 
Note the affliction to Moon by Saturn and Ketu. Moon debilitated. Mars by retro goes to 
Cancer and gets the links of Saturn and Ketu. This Mars with effects of Saturn and Ketu again 
afflict Moon. 
The Sun gets connected through Moon being in the same sign and by Mercury being retro 
which connects to Saturn, Ketu, Mars. Jupiter is exchanged with Saturn, and Saturn gets 
linked to Rahu. Rahu throws his influence on Taurus this makes Sun hemmed between 
Saturn, Ketu and Rahu. Both Sun and Moon affliction resulted in blindness. 
Saturn Ketu Mercury, Venus and Sun and with exchange of Saturn have given this child the 
music knowledge from the previous birth. 
Deafness or Diseases of Ears 
Mercury is to be studied for Deafness. 
If Mercury weak, debilitated and/or strongly afflicted by two or more out of 
Ketu, Mars, Rahu and Moon: Deafness is indicated. 
Lesser affliction will indicate Ear problems. 
Yoga Pha/a from Combination of Planets in Chart 
Example 26 
Mer 
Rah 
Mar 
Ven 
Jup 
117 
In this horoscope, the Mercury is debilitated, in Pisces. The other sign Sagittarius has Mars 
an enemy to Mercury. Mercury is linked to Moon who is again connected to Rahu. Mercury 
is directly linked to Ketu. This person has become deaf at the age of 5. 
Wherever possible we try to give the extra information about the signification of planets 
and their blending with other significations to arrive at certain hidden meaning. In this 
horoscope the native being famous sculptor, we are providing the detailed analysis. 
Jeeva karaka Jupiter is with Venus in the house of Mercury. There is an exchange between 
Jupiter and Mercury. By this Jupiter is linking to Moon in exalted Mercury house. Art planet 
Venus and Moon in the house of Mercury indicate the art of communicating with the efforts 
of Jeeva karaka Jupiter. Next to Venus in the house of Moon, Ketu and Saturn are posited 
indicating the art form is devoid of any karma. Ketu is linked to first Mercury in Pisces and 
by exchange the Jupiter enters Pisces. The art form is of Jeeva which has no karma. Venus 
also is linked to Mars in Jupiter house. Mars is stone or metals. The art form is of metal 
or stone of jeeva. This combination makes him a famous sculptor. 
Mercury is not only signifying intelligence, it also signifies the expressed intelligence. 
Cold Related Problems 
Moon is the planet indicating cold. Moon combination with Jupiter will indicate cold related 
problems to Male native. In female the Moon combination with Venus will indicate cold 
problems 
Based on the other planets and sign combinations different diseases relating cold are 
decided. The sign significations, their humor : Fire, Earth, Air, Water, the body portions, 
and the dignity the planets get in that place (Exalted, Debilitated, Friendly, Enemy sign) 
are all to be considered in arriving at the diagnosis of particular disease. 
118 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Example 27 
Complicated case related to: Sinus, Asthma, Headache, Cancer 
Ket-13 Jup-2® 
Mar-2® 
Female 
Ven-27 6/2/1978 
Sun-24 Sat-4® 
Moo-11 
Mer-9 
Rah-13 
Asc-18 
It is a female horoscope. Moon is with Venus in Saturn house. Cold problems confirmed. 
Rahu links to Moon. It is a chronic undetectable allergy case. Rahu from Mercury house and 
Mercury also with Moon indicates undetectable allergy. Saturn by retro goes to Moon house 
that is an Air planet in Water place and links Venus, Moon & Mercury. From Cancer the retro 
Saturn gets connected to Ketu in Pisces in water sign. Mars representing bone-marrow is 
also in water sign afflicted by Saturn combination. Mars by retro goes to Mercury house 
which is his enemy place. Sun is also participating in the entire combination. 
Saturn Air, Moon Water, Mercury & Mars allergy, Ketu blocking, all these have resulted in 
chronic asthma and sinus. Cancer represents, lungs and Mars represents chest bones. Sun 
denotes head in the human body and represents fever and Ketu representing pains, wounds 
and growth has resulted in first diagnosis as tuberculosis. This is because the involvement 
of Rahu a planet of Maya-bhrama (illusion-confusion). Jupiter is also retro in Mercury house 
& gone to Taurus and links Venus & other planets. Jupiter when in Mercury house gets the 
effect of Rahu. Due to this the first doctor has failed in diagnosis. By retro Jupiter goes 
to Venus house which is an enemy place (for living matters), but Rahu catches him from 
Virgo. The doctors again failed in diagnosis and feared acute pneumonia etc. From 
December 89 this girl was bedridden and admitted in various hospitals several times. In 
November 92 when Jupiter entered Virgo, she was diagnosed for cancer in chest bones and 
asthma. The proper treatment went on and cancer was cured but this woman is suffering 
from sinus, asthma and headaches in spite of continued medication. 
Moon, Saturn and Ketu = Asthma; Moon, Ketu, Mars = Growths; Moon, Ketu, Sun, 
Mars = Headache and Sinus. 
Yoga Pha/a from Combination of Planets in Chart 
Dental Disease 
Mars - represents Dental related matters. 
Enemy to Mars are 
Saturn, Rahu, Mercury & Ketu (against the nature of Mars in diseases) 
Saturn - a decaying planet delaying planet, it is a labor planet hence troubles. 
Rahu - an eclipsing planet, and will create cavity. 
Mercury - an Airy and duality planet, will give double teeth or flying teeth. 
Ketu - Indicate growth, gap and wounds. 
Example 28 
Dental problems 
Sun-28 
Mer-0.55 
Ven-16 
Rah-8 
Mar-17 
Female 
13/3/1955 
Dental disfigure 
Bad Smell 
Asthama 
Sat-27® 
Moo-21 
Asc-0.30 
Ket-8 
Jup-26® 
119 
Mars connects Rahu, Saturn and Moon. Saturn fit Moon are linking Ketu and Jupiter 
(expansion). Ketu is gap. Saturn an enemy, linking Mars indicates decaying of tooth. Rahu 
an enemy to Mars projects disturbed dental set up. Saturn with Ketu influence creates gaps. 
Moon in enemy house with enemy, creates blood defects in tooth gums. 
This lady has ugly looking teeth unevenly set with gaps. Her gums also get infected very 
often and smell badly. Over and above, Saturn, Moon, Ketu combination gave her asthma. 
Moon - Infections 
Rahu - Patches 
Ketu - Abrasion 
Mars - Bums and Scars 
Skin Disease 
Mercury is skin 
When these planets are associated with Mercury, the above effects are seen on the skin. 
120 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
In all the cases, the Mercury and the afflicting planets effect will be more predominant if 
they are weak either by debilitation or afflicted by enemies. 
Please refer example 12 for skin problems. 
Blood Diseases 
Blood has its mystic arid religious significance from the days of yore. It expresses the human 
characteristics such as courage and purity. Its prefix to relationships like "blood brother", 
"blood relative" denotes the genes carrying down the relationships. When it comes to the 
question of expression of mood the word "blood boiling" is used to quantify the anger. Its 
Colour is red and many fear at the sight of it and even faint. It has a defensive substance 
in the body against attack of foreign organisms. Blood maintains body temperature by 
circulating heat. All these above characteristics of Blood denote predominantly Mars 
qualities and therefore Blood is signified by Mars. 
There are certain functions of blood, like transportation of nutrients from digestive system, 
oxygen from lungs, waste products from cells, and hormones from endocrine system to 
respective parts of the body. By continuous exchange with tissue fluids, it helps in balancing 
electrolytes. 
These subtle functions signify the effect of Moon who signifies the modifications, transport 
and changes etc. When there is emotional disturbance, there is modification in the blood 
circulation. All these factors attribute "dynamic blood" to Moon. 
Therefore blood is represented by its static form Mars, in its dynamic form Moon. 
Enemies to Mars: Rahu, Saturn, Mercury, Ketu 
Enemies to Moon: Venus, Saturn, Rahu, Mercury, Ketu 
At Jeeva karaka level, Mars alone if associated, indicates pressure of Mars over Jeeva 
karaka, i.e. the characteristics will be "boiling nature". Therefore, the blood pressure will 
be more. 
The Saturn is Karma Deha and therefore any affliction to Saturn will also give the 
diseases due to past karma. 
1. JupiterNenus (male fit female native) if associated with Mars, are prone to blood 
pressures. 
2. If Moon is associated, being cold planet, there will be cold effect. Apart from it there 
will be a change in mental condition. 
3. When both Mars and Moon together associate with Jeeva karka, the Jeeva karaka is 
bound to have quick changes in blood flow and it may indicate the erratic blood 
circulations. They will have blood pressure problems both high and low and also suffer 
from mental irritation. 
4. If Rahu is influencing the blood indicator Mars, then there is foreign influence on the 
blood and the blood gets polluted. 
Yoga Phala from Combination of Planets in Chart 121 
5. lfKetu an obstructing, growth influencing planet, gets associated with Mars, then there 
will be defects relating to clotting and blocking in the blood. 
6. If Saturn is influencing Mars, then there will be slow movements, and Saturn also 
represents dust and waste, therefore, results in impure blood. 
7. Mercury is air and an allergy factor and if this influences Mars, there will be disturbed 
flow of blood which may cause allergy related problems. 
8. Again the factors are to be studied from the Rashi karakatwa and the planetary dignities 
in Rashis (signs) before arriving at final conclusion. 
9. No serious illness to be suspected unless more than two inflicting planets are involved. 
10. Involvement of Saturn and Sun-trines, will "indicate the suffering due to effect of 
previous karma. 
Example 29 
Blood related Problems: 
Sat-15® 
Rah-27 Asc-1 0 
Male Ven-25 
14/9/1969 
Blood Related 
Problem Sun-27 
Ket-27 
Jup-17 
Mer-21 
Mar-2 Moo-21 
Karma karaka Saturn is debilitated in the house of Mars and has connection with Mars. This 
Mars is in Sagittarius having link to Ketu. Ketu is having link wi!h Mercury and Moon through 
retro Saturn. Jupiter is also involved in this. Saturn by retro goes to Jupiter house Pisces 
and links Jupiter in Virgo. 
This is an indication of Saturn (karma karaka) who is in Sun-trine, by retro (means in the 
later part of the life), will give Jeeva karaka the blood related problems. Mars is blood, 
Ketu is blocking, Jupiter indicating fat, Mercury and Moon allergic and pollution, resulting 
in blood pressure, high cholesterol. Jupiter also indicates liver, since afflicted by Ketu 
Saturn and Mars, indicates liver problem. Ketu also acts as blocking agent for fat (Jupiter) 
which is trying to get burnt by Sun. This gentleman at the later part of the life i.e. in the 
2nd round of Saturn had developed cholesterol, blood pressure and blood impurity problems. 
122 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Saturn and Rahu are in visible half of the chart. Saturn is debilitated in the exaltation house 
of Sun and linking Sun and Ketu in the house of father and son (Leo). Saturn, Mars, Rahu, 
Sun and Ketu are in Sun-trine indicating the debt of relation. This indicates the sinful act 
relating to father or sun in previous janma (birth). 
Heart Disease 
When blood flows to a section of heart muscle and when it gets blocked the heart attack 
occurs. If there is no immediate restoration of blood flow the section of heart muscle 
becomes weak due to lack of oxygen and begins to die. Ultimately this may result in death 
if not treated. This block is caused due to formation of plaque inside the coronary arteries. 
This plaque is due to high level of cholesterol (fat in the body). 
The planets involved are: 
Blood represented by Mars 
Cholesterol (Fat) represented by Jupiter 
Blocking agent is Ketu 
The organ heart is represented by Sun 
(Sun supplies the life supporting energy. Heart supplies oxygen rich blood to all cells of the body 
for survival) 
The following combination indicates the heart problems 
Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Ketu/Rahu 
Jupiter, Ketu/Rahu, Mars, Sun 
Jupiter, Sun, Mars, Ketu/Rahu 
For female horoscope, Jupiter represents fat as usual. The combination of Mars, Sun and 
Ketu must be linked with Venus. 
An attack is of a sudden nature and unknown which may also cause death. Rahu indicates 
this factor and he is also "Kala purusha" who is ready to swallow the Jeeva karaka. The trines 
of Sun, Leo, Sagittarius and Aries are signs related to this problem. The role of Saturn 
indicates the previous karma and the end of karma in this birth. 
Yoga Pha/a from Combination of Planets in Chart 
Example 30 
Heart Problems 
Ket-5 
Asc-26 
Moo-18 
Mer-2 
Ven-9 
Sun-24 
Female 
8/6/1944 
Major Heart Surgery 
123 
Sat-5 
Rah-5 
Mar-16 
Jup-28 
Note that Venus who is with Sun in Taurus and having Ketu in gth_ Venus and Sun also gets 
connected to Saturn in Gemini who has link to Rahu and Mars and Jupiter. Jupiter and Mars 
posited in cancer links Ketu in Capricorn. Ascendent is 26 degrees and Moon is in 18 degrees 
which falls in the visible half indicating the sin relating to Moon from previous birth being 
transferred to present karma of Saturn who is in the invisible half. Saturn and Moon are 
in Sun-trine signs indicating the previous debt relating to Jeeva karaka representation of 
Moon (being in the house of Jeeva Sagittarius). 
It is because of the Karma the native (Venus) had to suffer the heart problem. Jupiter as 
Jeeva due to own uncontrolled mind (Rahu, Mars in Moon house with Jupiter), has supported 
the karma to aggravate the disease, which has resulted in heart transplantation. 
Sun and Ketu represents removal of heart. Mars and Rahu in Moon house linking Ketu indicate 
transplantation. (Rahu is foreign, Mars is body part, Moon for change). 
Example 31 
Heart Problems Rah-29 
Ast-24 
Jup®-6 
Moo-20 
Female 
19n/1949 
Heart Trouble 
Bypass Surgery 
Mar-6 
Mer-26 
Sun-5 
Ven-29 
Sat-12 
Ket-29 
124 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Venus is having Sun with it in Cancer and Rahu is in Pisces in trine to Cancer. 
Jupiter is directly linked to Sun and Venus, with the effect of Ketu which is a protection 
to the native. But the Ketu influence on Venus makes Venus blocked by Rahu, Sun and Ketu. 
Jupiter's protection is subject to the surgery which is indicated by retro motion of Jupiter. 
Jupiter by retro goes to Sagittarius. Moon, Mars, Mercury and Saturn gets linked to this 
retro Jupiter. Saturn is now connected to many planets indicating pending of karma. Jupiter 
is linked to Mars (Surgery), Ketu (Passage), and Mercury (skin), Moon (Change). Mars is in 
an enemy sign Gemini with enemy and it has the influence of Moon being in Aries. With 
Jupiter connection it indicates the fat layer (Mercury - Skin layer) to be changed or modified 
with surgery. This native had bypass surgery. 
Example 32 
Heart Problems 
Rah-2 
Male 
9/10/1947 
Heart Trouble 
Bypass - Survived 
Ket-2 Ven-3 
Jup-5 Mer-18 
Asc-19 
Mar-13 
Moo-15 
Sat-28 
Sun-23 
When a planet is in the axis of Rahu Et Ketu it gets the effect of both Rahu and Ketu. Jupiter 
is in the axis of Ketu and Rahu and in its trine Mars and Saturn are posited. 11th to Jupiter 
Sun is posited who is directly linked to Rahu. This person had the heart trouble and survived 
bypass surgery. Moon and Mars both are enemies to Rahu are with Saturn indicating balance 
of karma. They also cast their influence on Jupiter to protect from the approaching Rahu. 
Besides, Venus and Mercury cast their influence on Aquarius blocking the kalapurusha Rahu. 
These factors made the native survive bypass surgery. 
Yoga Ph ala from Combination of Planets in Chart 
Example 33 
Heart Problems 
Jup-17 
Rah-20 
Mer-18 
Mar-24 
Male 
15/6/1951 
Heart Problem 
Survived 
12) 
Sun-1 
Ven-15 
Asc-25 
Ket-20 
Sat-3 
Moo-29 
Mercury is dispositer of Saturn & Moon and Mars is with Mercury. Both Mars and Mercury 
link Saturn and Moon in Virgo. Mercury is also dispositer for Sun. Apart from this being in 
Gemini, Sun is 2nd to both Mercury and Mars who is linked to Rahu in Aquarius. There are 
many common factors which have been discussed in earlier example with regard to Mars, 
Mercury and Moon. This person has suffered from heart problem. There are a number of 
planets between Rahu and Jupiter and similarly Ketu has number of planets ahead of it 
before reaching Saturn. Due to this assured longevity, this person had overcome the dangers 
from heart problem. 
Note: Linking of planets is most important. A planet may get linked through its dispositer, or being 
in the other house of its lordship or through a planet which is posited in 2'd to it. The connections 
may also have to be seen by exchange of planets and retro motion of the planets. 
Diabetes, Bladder, Kidney, Urinary and Uterus 
Venus represents sweet. Transporting agent of blood is Moon. Pancreas produce insulin, 
pancreas is made up of tissues represented by Mars. Mercury is filtering agent, and also 
being enemy to Mars, damage the tissues. Therefore, for diabetes the combination of Venus 
+ Moon with participation of Mercury and Mars is to be studied in relation to Jupiter or 
Saturn. 
The same combination will also indicate urinary infections, kidney problems and uterus 
problems. This will also indicate problems connected with digestive disorders, due to 
dilution of digestive enzymes, by Moon, Venus and Mercury afflicting Mars. 
126 
Example 34 
Diabetes 
Asc-28 
Ket-24 
Male 
12/11/1955 
Problem 
Diabetes 
Ven-14 Mer-12 
Rah-24 Sun-25 
Sat-39 
Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Jup-6 
Mar-25 
Moo-29 
Jupiter is in Leo and the Lord Sun is in Libra with Mercury and Saturn. Jupiter is having Mars 
and Moon in 2"d and except Ketu all planets are in a Grahamalika (One after the other in 
signs). Both Saturn and Jupiter are linked to Venus, Rahu, Mercury, Mars and Moon. Mars 
and Moon are afflicted by Ketu. The effect is more predominant on karma planet Saturn 
and hence the native suffered from diabetes in the later part of the life. 
Example 35 
Diabetes and Kidney problem 
r.;.tiiill 
Ket-15 Sun-12 
Moo-11 
Mer-6 
Mar-22 
Male Ven-27 
28/6/1959 
Diabetes 
Kidney Problem 
Rah-15 
Sat-10® Jup-29® 
1. Saturn by retro connects Ketu, Moon, Venus, Mars and Mercury. 
2. Jupiter by retro falls in Rahu/Ketu axis and links Moon and this Moon is linked to Venus, 
Mars and Mercury. 
3. Venus is in the sign of Moon and the dispositer Moon is in the exalted house of Venus. 
Yoga Pha/a from Combination of Planets in Chart 127 
These combinations have contributed not only to diabetes but also kidney problem. 
Mars representing the organ is protected by Sun and Jupiter therefore, with surgery the 
problem was resolved. However, it is not a permanent relief as Saturn karma karaka 
is also connected from the debilitated house of Moon indicating total damage at a later 
stage. 
Body Pains 
The pain in the body obstructs normal functioning of a person. In the earlier chapters it 
is explained that Rahu is jeeva sankata karaka. Ketu is of constrict nature. When these two 
planets get associated by Naadi rules, the person is bound to suffer from pains. There are 
varieties of pains. Main reason for pain is Vaata (gas or air) constitution. Rahu represents 
air element besides a killer planet in the event of ending of karma. The pain can be due 
to muscle constriction or nerve blocking due to gas problems. 
Normally it is called rheumatic pain or joints pain. One of the reasons for joint pains is 
degeneration of the cartilage a buffer material between joints. The most advanced stage 
of body pain is popularly known as arthritis. 
Whatever the type of pain, ultimately, it is Rahu and Ketu which are related to Saturn or 
Jupiter which indicates this problem. However, planets of cold nature, Moon and Venus are 
other factors which aggravate and create more complications. 
There are worst cases of arthritis, where the entire body gets crippled and the native 
becomes completely handicapped. Such grave sufferings are attributed as the resultant of 
past bad karma. Therefore, Saturn and Sun-trine reveals the cause behind the suffering. 
At times the past bad deeds may be of lesser degree, but due to bad deeds during this birth 
represented by Jupiter, this sort of suffering may occur. 
Ultimately the Body pains of any nature has to be studied from Rahu or Ketu with Saturn 
or Jupiter or both (this happens when another planet is involved). 
Example 36 
Body Pains 
Mar-11 
Mer-1 
Rah-17 Sun-24 
Sat-22 
Ven-7 
Female 
Actress 
8/6/1911 
Rheumatoid Arthritis 
Jup-12® 
Ket-17 
Moo-22 
128 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
She was a famous film actress, who suffered from rheumatoid arthritis. See the connection 
of Rahu to Saturn. Jupiter is with Ketu and Moon. By retro Jupiter goes to Virgo and connects 
Mars who has Venus in 5th to it in Cancer a Moon house and 2nd to Mars there are Saturn 
and Rahu. Jupiter by retro connects Sun and Mercury in Venus house indicating medical 
treatment to sustain from pains. She maintained herself with medication. 
Example 37 
A Female Horoscope Asc-5 Sat-17® 
Rah-27 
Female 
14/11/1944 
Arthritis 
Jup29 
Ket-27 Moo-11 
Ven-5 Mer-13 Sun-29 
Mar-29 
In the invisible side of the horoscope in Gemini, Saturn and Rahu are situated and on the 
visible side in the Sagittarius, Venus is approached by Ketu. Saturn is afflicted by Rahu and 
Venus (female jeeva karaka) in the house of jeeva karaka Sagittarius is afflicted by Ketu. 
The previous karma though in the moksha marga (metaphysical), the native had to take 
birth due to balance of rinanubandha karma (debt relation) related to Moon (mother and 
mother-in-law), Sun (father), Mercury in the sign of Mars (father-in-law), Mars in the house 
of Venus (brother-in-law). While discharging these karma, the native will have to undergo 
the sufferings. She is suffering from Arthritis. 
Piles 
Tensions, long hours of standing or sitting, obesity, stress and food habits are all the root 
cause of Piles. Its symptoms are anal itching, pain, bleeding, and extensions. Moon is blood, 
Mercury indicates skin, blocking is done by Ketu and Mars causes the injuries. Ketu indicates 
the anal portion and growths. Rahu indicate pain and itching. There must be a connection 
to both Rahu and Ketu through Mercury, Moon, or Mars and there must be involvement of 
at least two out of Mercury, Moon, and Mars. This combination if relates to either Jupiter/ 
Venus or Saturn, the native will have piles. 
Planets involved: Moon, Mars, Mercury any two of them: 
Rahu indicates pain and itching. 
Ketu indicates growths and blocks. 
Yoga Pha/a from Combination of Planets in Chart 129 
The same combination is also reflected in cancer related matters, especially, if Moon is 
predominantly connected with Ketu. 
Example 38 
Piles 
Jup-20 
Ven-11 
Rah-7 
Ket-7 
Saturn + Rahu, Jupiter+ Rahu, linking Mercury, Moon, Mars. 
A male horoscope, the visible side has only Rahu indicating the carry forward bad karma, 
relating to Jupiter and Venus. Rahu links Saturn and Jupiter. Ketu is not connected. Moon 
is connected to Saturn retro. Mercury fit Mars are linked to Saturn retro by ih relationship 
and to Jupiter by 2nd indicating piles related problem which will not turn into wound or 
growths. He suffered from irritable bowl syndrome. 
Suicidal tendencies 
Causes for suicidal tendency are many: 
1 Isolated feeling 
2 Refusal of wants 
3 Emotional imbalance 
4 Pain beyond resistance 
5 Loss of hopes 
Any one reason cannot be pin pointed for suicidal tendencies, ultimately it all amounts to 
the mental depression. The blocking of positive thought process to live, can be termed as 
suicidal tendency. 
First priority: There must be mental tensions: Moon is Mind, Mars is agitation: 
Moon+ Mars. 
Next the mind must be in a state of beyond reasoning the cause of tension. The association 
of Rahu or Ketu with Jeeva Karaka or Karma Karaka will indicate these by their sign position 
or association with other planets. 
130 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Moon + Mars+ Rahu or Ketu indicate suicidal tendencies if connected to Jeeva or Karma 
planets. These should be closely associated being in the same sign or same direction. Jupiter 
+ Rahu, Saturn + Ketu, both in birth and transit if inter-linked as per Naadi rules decide 
the end of life. 
Mental imbalance or insanity: 
In such cases the person will be deprived of normal day to day functioning. Physical or 
mental abnormality can be seen in such cases. Saturn or Jupiter must be blocked. Moon 
must have enemy planets or planets which would block the mental progress. Mars is an 
indicator of physical behaviour and if connected to Moon it indicates the agitating 
tendencies. 
Combination : (Saturn + Ketu) (Jupiter+ Rahu) + Moon or (Saturn + Moon), (Jupiter+ Moon) 
+ Rahu or Ketu 
In both the cases involvement Rahu indicate physical or mental aggressive behavior. 
It is not easy to find out this condition from the horoscope as this could be mainly due to 
past karma. The first glance of horoscope wilt not give any clue. Therefore, we recommend 
drawing the horary chart at the time of consultation and then to see the same hora lord 
in the birth chart. This will give you the clue of the major matter for which the consultant 
has approached you. 
At this point it is absolutely essential to establish the above fact by practical horoscope. 
Example 39 
\ 
Rah 
/ v 
Moo \ 
v.,,. 
Yen 
Mer 
. _L Undevelopment 
Asc / 
Sun Condition 1\ ~obi JUP® 
Mar\ 
Sat 
Ket 
The first glance of horoscope does not reveal anything about the mental problem. Jupiter 
links Moon, Venus, Mercury. Saturn is with Mars and Ketu. Moon is with Venus and Mercury. 
The combination of Mars, Saturn, Ketu does not have any Moon connection. 
Yoga Phala from Combination of Planets in Chart 131 
We have considered the hora at present while writing this example. The hora chart is given 
below: 
-
Moo-2.35 
Mar®-9.05 
Rah-5.25 
23-11-2007 
22-15 
Sunday 
Sunrise 6.44 am 
Venus Hora Ket-5.25 
Sat®-14.3< 
Jup-7.08 
Sun-7.30 Ven-27.31 
Mer-10.56 
The hora Lord is Venus in its own house. Venus does not have any planet in 2, 12 and 7. 
In 51h Kalapurusha Rahu is posited. In gth sign Gemini Mars is retrograde. Mars and Rahu 
are enemies. Venus is having enemies both the sides creating trouble. Moon an enemy 
planet to Venus is having Mars in 5th and Rahu in 91h. This is a clear indication of mental 
problem causing suffering to hora lord Venus representing the native. 
Let us study the Venus in the natal chart. Venus is in Aquarius along with Moon and Mercury. 
The hora lord is with an enemy planet Moon. The effect of Mars Saturn and Ketu is falling 
in Pisces which blocks movement of Moon, Mercury fit Venus. The sign behind Venus is having 
another enemy Sun and this sign is captured by Rahu. The hora lord along with mind 
representing planet Moon and intelligent planet Mercury are totally blocked from 
movement. Studying hora lord Venus in hora and natal charts, problem of mind and 
intelligence is indicated clearly. 
With this clue let us analyse the natal chart. In Natal chart Jupiter is in Leo and his retro 
movement to Cancer is blocked by the effect of Mars, Saturn, and Ketu from Scorpio. When 
Jupiter gets direct and moves towards Virgo, Kalapurusha Rahu is capturing Virgo. 
Therefore, the Jeeva karaka is totally blocked. Similarly Karma karaka Saturn does not have 
any planet in 2, 12, 5 and 9 and the place 7 is occupied by Rahu. Saturn is with enemies 
Mars and Ketu. Karma is also blocked. Earlier we had seen that the mind and intelligence 
are blocked by Rahu, and Ketu. This man is surviving with underdeveloped mental 
condition. 
Note: This is a classic example of finding out the blocking of movement of signification like Mind, 
Intelligence, Jeeva and Karma. This is primary test to be conducted in all the horoscopes to know 
the condition of the native. 
132 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Accidents 
Accidents occur when there is no presence of mind or it could be all of a sudden due to 
some other factors. Such unforeseen circumstances are represented by Rahu. In accidents, 
the body gets hurt and therefore, Mars must get involved in the combination. It can be 
due to present conditions or due to past deeds, which will have to be analysed through 
the involvement of jeeva the Jupiter, karma the Saturn, Sun-trines, or Moon-trines. 
1. Rahu, Mars, Jupiter or Venus (Female) 
2. Rahu, Mars, Saturn 
These combinations will indicate accidents. It is to be studied in relation with the present 
horary chart. The transit of major planets, Rahu and Saturn or Jupiter must be seen. If 
Jupiter or Saturn is hemmed between Rahu, Ketu, Mars, etc, it indicates the immobility 
of jeeva or karma by which the seriousness of accidents can be judged. 
A careful study is essential on diseases, because there are many types of diseases, which 
need a precise application of karakatwa. In this book, we are only suggesting the 
combination based on the general karakatwa of planet and signs for the purpose of 
analysing the disease. However, this is not exhaustive. Naadi medical astrology is a separate 
subject, which is being experimented, and the same will be published after successful 
completion of the research. It is observed that in almost all the cases the involvement of 
Rahu and Ketu are found. The planet in the axis of Rahu and Ketu is more important. 
However, for the purpose of general indication, the above combinations can be used and 
the probability of diseases can be identified. Not only the combination but also we should 
watch the friendly planet to the above combination especially from Sun-trine signs and 
in particular the planet Jupiter. This can also happen during the long transit periods in Sun-
trine signs by Jupiter or Saturn. Under such circumstances cure from diseases and escape 
from dangers are possible. 
We draw the attention of the readers to a point in the entire charts of diseases. If you 
observe closely in almost all the charts Moon and Saturn are linked. This we observed while 
writing this chapter. Further study on this aspect is essential. Presently the logic running 
in our mind is that Saturn who passes on the effect of previous karma is to be experienced 
by mind represented by Moon. This is only a possibility and research has to be conducted 
on this point. (Perhaps this may have some relationship with sade-sathi ??) 
Education 
Sun represents life saving force therefore, the Medical line is attributed to this planet. 
Sun being a governing planet will include Political Science, Sociology. 
Sun being a bright planet, indicates the success in Education. 
Sun being an authority and planet of reputation will indicate Education or help in learning 
from such significations. 
Yoga Phala from Combination of Planets in Chart 133 
Moon, a mental planet, with lots of emotion, and variety of taste, is attributed with Artistic 
knowledge. 
Moon being a changing planet, indicates, Change of place or Change in education line 
Moon being a liquid Planet indicates study of Chemistry and Liquid related subjects. 
Moon being a blood indicating planet, also indicates Pathological subjects. 
Moon being a planet indicating food, supports the subjects related to Hotel management. 
Moon being a travel planet, indicates, subjects related to Travel. 
Moon represents mind and it also relates to the subject Psychology, 
Mars being "dharani garbha sambhoota", represents knowledge to produce from earth 
liking mining, agriculture. 
Mars being "shakti" power represents knowledge of powered activities 
Mars being "shastra" Weapons, it represents knowledge in Weapons or Surgery. 
Mars being "senadhipathi" warrior indicates defense related knowledge. 
Mars being "aham" ego will also indicate obstruction in education. 
Mercury being "buddhi" intelligence will include Mathematics, Logic, Statistics and 
Drawing and Commerce. 
Mercury being "bhoomi" land it may include knowledge of Geography and related subject. 
Mercury "vak" communication indicates knowledge relating Communications and Teaching. 
Mercury "vyapara" transactions it includes subject related to Business. 
Jupiter represents wisdom hence it indicates success in education. It also indicates subject 
related to Endowments, Audit, Preaching and SupeNision. 
Venus being a friend to Mercury will indicate Expertise in selected filed or higher education. 
Apart from it also indicates Arts, Marketing, and Housekeeping. 
Saturn indicates the long and continuous learning. It also indicates delay in learning. 
Rahu indicates Nuclear science, Atomic powers, Chemicals and Airways and Foreign 
studies. It also indicate marred intellect (intelligence not applied) 
Ketu indicates subjected related to relieving persons from troubles, like Medicine, Law and 
Occult sciences. It also relates to Metaphysical subjects. It has the tendency to block 
materialistic knowledge. 
134 
Example 40 
Education 
Moo-12 
Rah-25 
Mar-20 
Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Asc-18 
Jup-24® 
Male Ket-25 30/10/1952 
Under Graduate 
A Clerk in 
Government 
Mer-5 Sun-14 
Ven-17 Sat-27 
Mercury is taken for analysis. Mercury is in the house of Mars, Scorpio an enemy house. It 
has connection to Moon from Pisces and Ketu from Cancer a Moon house again. In the other 
sign of Mars, Jupiter is posited and he is retro and goes to Pisces and joins Moon. 
Mars is in 2nd sign to Mercury. There is an exchange between Mars and Jupiter. 
The very position of Mercury in the house of Mars in spite of being with Venus did not give 
him higher education. The 2nd house Mars troubled his education, Moon and Ketu made him 
stop the education. The exchange of Jupiter has only helped him to complete the pre-
degree course. Jupiter by retro in Pisces supports Saturn in Virgo. The change of place has 
given him the job due to Saturn in Mercury house having Sun in Venus house. 
Saturn in the house of Mercury, indicates clerical job. Rahu connection (Capricorn a labour 
sign) to Saturn indicates the low profile hard work. 
Example 41 
Education Mer-22 
Sun-15 
Rah-18 
Moo-13 
Ven-1 
Sat-14 Asc-22 
Mar-23 
Female 
30/3/1970 
Commerce Graduate 
Ket-18 
Jup-10® 
Yoga Pha/a from Combination of Planets in Chart 135 
Debilitated Mercury is in the house of Jupiter. Jupiter by retro goes to Virgo and gets 
exchanged with Mercury and Mercury loses its debilitation. 
With the links of Jupiter and having relationship with him by retro from Virgo, the education 
is of commercial nature. The Moon in the other house of Jupiter in Sagittarius will effect 
change of place for education. In 2nd to Mercury, there is Mars who should obstruct the 
education. Nevertheless, Mars is with Saturn who is enemy to Mars and friend to Mercury. 
Saturn is also supported by Venus. Venus being a higher studies planet connected by Moon 
and Ketu and Venus being in the house of Mars did not support higher studies beyond 
graduation. Though there was delay, the native completed her graduation. 
The profession planet Saturn is in the house of Mars along with Mars supported by Venus 
and having Ketu in the Sun's house, but the presence of Moon in trine, who is enemy to 
Venus and Saturn, has changed the situation and the Saturn has to look for some support. 
The only support he gets is Jupiter being in ih to him. Jupiter by retro goes to Virgo and 
links to Mercury and Sun. Mercury being in the house of preacher, and getting exchanged 
with Jupiter, has supported profession as a teacher. The effect of Ketu turned to human 
services in teaching. Moon and Venus connection makes lesser income. This person has taken 
up teacher post in a school. 
Example 42 
Education 
Sun-3 
Mer-17<8> 
Mar-17 
Ven-21 
Moo-29 
Asc-10 
Sat-9® 
Female 
Engineer 
Working as Draftsman 
Jup-4® 
Ket-12 
Mercury in the house of Saturn is conjunct with Mars. Mercury being retro escapes the 
obstructive effect of Mars. Mars with the link of retro Jupiter turns to technical matter. 
Mars also being in the house of Saturn supports the karma in that line though causes trouble 
in that field. Jupiter by retro links Mercury from Venus house which is the house of higher 
education. Saturn by retro goes to Gemini and links Mercury. The higher education planet 
Venus is in 12th to Mercury and Mercury also by retro connects to Venus. Sun in the 2"d house 
to this technical education combination indicates success in her higher education. Moon in 
the Jupiter house will give her change of place in education. 
133 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Saturn links Sun and also Jupiter. Saturn goes to Gemini and links Mercury and Mars. The 
profession is of technical nature. Mercury and Ketu represent drawing, Mars represents 
instruments. She is a draftsman. 
Example 43 
Education: 
Moo-3 
Ven-20 
Mer-11® 
Sun-10 
Ket-16 
Male 
Ph.D 
Researcher on Crops 
Asc-6 
Mar-9 Jup-4 
Sat-25 Rah-16 
Mercury in the house of Jupiter with Sun, education success is guaranteed. Next to this 
combination, Venus is in Capricorn and Moon is next to Venus in Aquarius. Both the signs 
are ruled by Saturn. Saturn is in the house of Mars along with Mars. Mercury with the effect 
of Venus and Moon by retro goes to Scorpio where Mars and Saturn are posited and in 12th 
to this combination, Jupiter with his support is linking the effects of Moon from Aquarius 
and Rahu from Libra. Sun is in 2nd sign (Sagittarius) indicating success. Moon (in Aquarius, 
is a sign of research), Mars connection indicates agriculture. Scorpio is a sign of water and 
being a sign of Mars indicates technical knowledge. This indicates a higher technical 
education, related to agriculture field. The native has done his Ph.D., in a particular crop. 
The close connection of Saturn to this combination indicates the profession in the same 
field. 
Note: Apparently a horoscope may appear to be negative to certain matters, but the inter-linking 
factors, like retro motion, exchange, and the sign position of planets wilt give a different picture. 
This art must be developed by experience. Normally an exchange or retro motion will have hidden 
matters of the results. 
Yoga Phata from Combination of Planets in Chart 137 
Example 44 
Rah-26 
Mar-4 
Jup-20 Moo-6 
Priest 
Multifarious Activity 
22/11/1986 
Asc-1 
Sun-6 Ven®-12 Ket-26 
Sat-17 Mer®-19 
No academic education but philosophical bent of mind having interest in multifarious 
activities, being a religious priest: 
There is an exchange of Saturn and Mars. Venus and Mercury both are retrograde. Moon, 
Sun, Saturn and Rahu are in Moon-trine. After exchange Mars goes to Sun in Scorpio and 
Saturn goes to Jupiter in Sun-trine sign. We shall begin with father. Father is Sun, he is in 
Scorpio along with Saturn, Moon and Rahu. He would be in the profession of travel related. 
Rahu though indicates foreign trip with Saturn, due to exchange of Saturn with Mars, Rahu 
changes its activity from foreign to something big in nature. Once Saturn goes to Jupiter 
it indicates profession related with the travelling of jeeva karaka and Rahu approaching 
indicates number of jeeva karakastravelling. Moon is water, Mars is heating, Saturn is smoke 
and Rahu indicate the long shape. This indicates the Rail carrying people. This gentleman 
was working for Railways. Rahu in trine position to Sun and Sun does not have any planet 
after Saturn in the next two signs. The 11th sign from Sun is having Ketu (moksha) effect 
in Capricorn. This indicates the short life to father. Native lost his father. Mercury by retro 
and Venus with effect of Mars by retro goes to Ketu indicating the breaks in education. In 
exchange Saturn goes to Jupiter linking Venus and Mercury and the learning gets support 
by karma. Mercury and Venus joining Ketu indicate the moksha-karma (metaphysical). This 
native started earning by becoming a priest. Saturn (karma karaka}, is linked to Moon and 
Rahu where Rahu becomes useless due to exchange of Mars. Mercury, Ketu and Venus in 
Mercury house with Jupiter link gave him the artistic talent of painting, drawing and 
knowledge of poetry. Rahu has given him the interest in film land and being weak did not 
provide any professional opportunity. Mars link with Jupiter after exchange has given him 
interest in sports and he plays cricket regularly in spite of having the profession in the 
religious activities. The link of Ketu made him more philosophical in nature and the Mars 
driven him towards the mantra-sadhana. At this very young age, this boy has undergone 
many processes in mantra-sadhana and he is interested to progress further in this field. 
With all these talents, due to Moon (changing), he is unable to concentrate on any single 
138 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
activity. However, as per Naadi rules, Jupiter and Saturn (after exchange) are linked to Sun, 
Mercury, and Venus (destiny makers) which assures the native a bright future. Mercury and 
Venus are connected to Ketu by retro indicating "buddhi-dravya-keerti-yogJ' (intelligence-
affluence-fame). Therefore, he is bound to shine in the field of metaphysical matters and 
make a name. He has the chance of going to foreign. 
PROFESSION 
Saturn indicates the profession of the person: Certain general combinations relating to 
professional matters are given below: 
Saturn + Sun (or in Leo or connected to Leo or to Sun through other planets) 
Profession relates to that of his father or the profession relates to the Government. 
Saturn + Moon 
Liquids, Arts, Travel related 
(This also indicates change in work place and blames in work sphere) 
Saturn + Mars 
Unformed services, profession related to Technical field. 
(This will also indicate harassment at work place) 
Saturn + Mercury 
Profession can be Business, Teaching, Accounts, Communication, Writing etc. 
Saturn + Jupiter 
Smooth profession 
Saturn + Venus 
Profession relates to Finance, Arts, Luxury. 
Saturn + Rahu 
Unethical or Secretive jobs. 
Note: If Rahu is approaching Saturn, it indicates hardships and problems in the work sphere. 
If Moon is also linked then it indicates foreign related jobs. 
Saturn + Ketu 
Profession relates to religious activities, service to humanity which may include Doctors fit 
Lawyers. It also indicates dejection and dispute at work sphere (provided influenced by 
Mercury, Venus, Jupiter or Sun). 
In all the cases the Rashi karakatwa are to be considered and also to take into consideration 
the effect of other planets involved. 
There are jobs which relate to the education. In such cases, the Saturn connection with 
Mercury and commercial sign of Mercury or the planets as dispositer to Mercury should be 
studied. In the present conditions the job profile has changed, irrespective of qualification 
the job relates to many other faculties. This has to be carefully studied before advising 
Yoga Phala from Combination of Planets in Chart 139 
suitable profession to the consultant. There are certain techniques which if applied properly 
can help to identify the job profiles which we have enumerated in the combination of 
planets. We have used key points in structuring the karakatwa which will be useful in 
determining the right profession. This should be done after considering the Rashi karakatwa 
and other influence of planets. 
In the following example horoscopes we will be touching such key points which will give 
an insight into the framing of combinations for profession. 
Sun connection with Saturn: 
Example 45 
Government Ordinary Job: 
Jup®-2 
Ket-3 
Moo-4 Asc-10 
Govt. Employee 
Born on 
14/11/1953 
Rah-3 
Sat-10 
Ven-11 Mar-15 
Sun-28 
Mer®-28 
Saturn is in the Sun trine sign along with Venus & Sun and Mercury® who goes to his exalted 
sign. Rahu is connecting Mercury® and Mars in Virgo. The Rahu Mars combination in Virgo 
makes him non daring. Jupiter by his retro motion links Mercury and Mars in Virgo. 
The Sun connection indicates the government Job. Mercury retro with Rahu and Mars 
connection indicates junior post in clerical side. The Moon connection indicates change of 
place in job i.e. transferable job. 
140 Revelation from Naadi Jyotisha 
Sun connection with Saturn: Moo-29 
Example 46 Asc-26 
Jup-17 
Government Good Position: 
Rah-8 
Govt. Employee 
Born on 
1/2/1952 
Sun-18 Ket-8 
Mer-4 
Ven-12 Mar-12 Sat®-22 
Saturn in Virgo sign indicating commercial nature, connected to Sun and Mercury in 
Capricorn, indicates Government commercial job. Saturn is retro goes to Leo a Sun sign and 
having Ketu indicating obstructions. Saturn is having Moon and Jupiter in Pisces. Moon 
indicates travelling or transfers and blames. Jupiter with Saturn indicates dharma- karma. 
The Saturn in exalted house of Mercury connected to Sun and Mercury and by retro Saturn 
connecting Ketu in Leo. Here Ketu in the Sun-trine is not creating obstruction to karma, 
but it is indicating the objectionable commercial transactions to be brought to the notice 
of government (Sun). The native is an Audit officer in the government department. 
Sun connection with Saturn: 
Example 47 
Government High Position Asc-18 
Sat-2 Ket-9 
Top Rank 
Police Officer 
29/12/1934 
Rah-9 
Ven-24 Mar-16 
Sun-14 Jup-23 Moo-17 
Mer-13 
Saturn in Sun-trine is connected to Jupiter in Libra another Sun-trine. Jupiter by exchange 
with Venus goes to Sagittarius. Sun and Mercury are in Sagittarius and Venus comes to Libra. 
Rahu with Mars and Moon is approaching Venus who has come to Libra in exchange with 
Jupiter. This Indicates Government service involving high profile, secrets, fraud, and 
violence. The native served in Police department holding a high post. 
Yoga Phala from Combination of Planets in Chart 
Saturn + Moon = Moving Job 
Saturn + Rahu + Mars 
Computer Profession-
Foreign travel 
Example 48 
Rah-24 
Mar-18 
141 
Ven-17 Sat-4 Moo-16 
Mer-19 Sun-12 
Asc-11 
Ket-24 
1st Job - Medical Rep. 
2nd Job - Computer 
Profession 
Travel Aspects 
27/5/1971 
Jup®-8 
Saturn is in Moon karma-trine sign which is also exalted place of Moon. Saturn is with 
'cthanwantri'(medical) planet Sun. Next to Saturn Moon is in Gemini indicating travel. Next 
to Moon Ketu is in Cancer another Moon sign indicating medicine. Next to Ketu there are 
no planets. Ketu also indicates termination of Job and Moon indicates change. Ketu has 
Jupiter in Scorpio and Jupiter is connected to Saturn. This shows there is a change in job 
at a later date. With Jupiter connection Saturn is again connected to Rahu and Mars in 
Capricorn. Rahu is shadow, Mars indicates technical field. This indicates the computer job. 
By retro Jupiter also connects to Venus and Mercury in Aries a Sun-trine sign assuring 
prosperity. The association of Moon and Rahu gave him foreign trips. 
Example 49 
Saturn + Mars -
Technical Profession: Sat-23 
Mer-8 
Sun-23 
Jup-22 
Ven-9 
Ket-17 
, 
7/3/1939 
Technical Job 
Chief Engineer in 
Electricity Dept. 
Asc-4 Rah-17 Moo-20 
Mar-29 