 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Each sage describes God in his own way. In reality, 
none has perceived God in His Absolute form. No one 
can fully describe God. All only try and tell from their 
standpoint. A nadi can be written for men. It may be 
accurate. Though there are many nadi texts , who can 
write the nadi for God? God and His Shakthi are not 
different.”* 
    Vasantha Sai  
 
 (*from the book Brahma Sutra) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This book must be read by all devotees of God. Those 
who enjoy delving into the inscrutable, transcendent and 
ever unfolding play of divinity will marvel at these readings. 
In this collection of nadis, the rishis, sages and siddhas 
declare the greatness of  the Avatarhood of Sri Sathya Sai 
Baba and reveal the incredible conclusion of His mission of 
ushering in the Golden Age, the Sathya Yuga, the Shakthi 
Yuga. Any doubts regarding the identity of His consort and 
their relationship of quiet separation are lai d to rest by 
these enlightening readings. They are but an echo of the 
prophetic words of Sri Vasantha Sai’s books. 
 
“Though His Atma left His physical body, the same Atma will 
come again and attain the same physical form. This is destiny… 
He will not be in  an aged body or a yo ung body, but middle 
aged...”   ...Viswamitra Nadi (2008) 
 
“…now at this time, her Lord is no longer in the physical body. 
He will come again in a new body. This will be an auspicious 
day for Mother.”   …Bhrigu Nadi  
 
“He will then descend here, His body being the age of 58 to 60 
years of age. He will be reborn on this earth in a body of this 
age. Only then will He reveal Himself to the world and all will 
know the truth.     ...Macchamuni  Nadi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Sacred Nadis: 
Sri Sathya Sai Baba 
And Sri Vasantha Sai 
 
Compiled by Sri Vasantha Sai 
 
 
eBook copyright 2014 © Sri Vasantha Sai Books & Publications Trust 
 
ISBN: 978-93-81008-63-8 
 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this 
publication may be reproduced or 
transmitted in any form or stored in a 
retrieval system or translated into any 
language for any means without written 
permission of the author, except for brief 
excerpts or quotations with appropriate 
credit to this book. This version is made 
available as an electronic book (eBook) in 
a protected file that should not be 
reproduced in any website other than 
www.vasanthasai.org without the written 
permission from the Sri Vasantha Sai 
Books & Publications Trust. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dedication 
 
 
By the grace of the saints, sages and 
siddhas, I have done as You requested. I offer 
this book at Your  lotus feet in time for Your 
arrival. My heart is filled with longing and 
tears drop from my eyes thinking of the 
bountiful grace and blessings You have 
bestowed on me. I await Your return. Please 
come quickly and finish this great task of 
liberating all. 
       the dust of Your feet , 
your agni flower...  

      Contents  
 
 Notes for the Reader  
 Prologue 
 List of Nadi readings: 
Sri Sathya Sai Baba 
Agasthya Maha Shiva Nadi . . . 1 
Kagabhujandar Nadi   . . . 4 
Raja Rishi Viswamitra Nadi . . . 6 
Shuka Nadi   . . . . 8 
Narada Nadi   . . . . 9 
Deva Rishi Nadi  . . . . 11 
Bogar Nadi   . . . . 13 
Agasthya Nadi   . . . . 15 
Nandeeshwara Nadi . . . . 18 
Gorakka Nadi  . . . . 20 
Sri Vasantha Sai 
Agasthya Maha Shiva Nadi . . . 23 
Agasthya Nadi  . . . . 25 
Agasthya Maha Shiva Nadi . . . 27 
Agasthya Nadi  . . . . 28 
Maha Shiva Nadi  . . . . 29 
Shukar Agasthyar Nadi . . . . 30 
Kagabhujandar Nadi . . . . 33 
Kausika Tulya Nadi  . . . . 36 
Kausika Nadi  . . . . 37 
Kagabhujandar Nadi . . . . 39 
Agasthya Nadi  . . . . 41 
Agasthya Shuka Nadi . . . . 44 
Mahashiva Thulya Nadi  . . . 46 
Maha Shiva Vaakya Nadi . . . 48 
Vashista Nadi  . . . . 49 
Vashista Nadi  . . . . 51 
Readings taken after 24 April 2011 
(The day Sri Sathya Sai Baba left the body)  
Bogar Nadi    . . . . 53 
Deva Rishi Nadi  . . . .  54 
Atri Maharishi Nadi . . . . 56 
Paambattie Siddha Nadi  . . . 58 
Thirumoolar Nadi   . . . . 60 
Bhrigu Nadi    . . . . 62 
Romarishi Nadi   . . . . 64 
Rajarishi Viswamitra Nadi . . . 66 
Pulasthya Nadi  . . . . 68 
Puskan Nadi   . . . . 69 
Sattai Muni Nadi  . . . . 70 
Gorakka Nadi  . . . . 71 
Narada Muni Nadi  . . . . 72 
Ashtabandanar Siddha Nadi . . . 73 
Bhrigu Nadi   . . . . 74 
Bogar Nadi   . . . . 75 
Pulipaani Siddha Nadi . . . . 76 
Macchamuni Nadi . . . . 77 
Kudumbai Siddar Nadi  . . . . 77 
Idai Kadar Siddar Nadi . . . . 79 
Important Additional Nadi Readings and Notes 
  
Kagabhujandar Nadi for the Mukthi Stupi . 81 
Kagabhujandar Nadi for the Vishwa Brahma   
 Garbha Kottam . . . . 86 
Verses of Sage Shri Veera Brahmam Garu &  
 Conclusion . . . . . 89 
 
 
Notes for the reader: 
 Nadis are sacred palm leaf texts written many thousands of years ago 
by sages and siddhas. 
 The nadis in this book are placed in chronological order: first, those of 
Sri Sathya Sai Baba followed by those of Sri Vasantha Sai. 
 They were compiled with the guidance of Sri Vasantha Sai. 
 The nadis are written in the ancient Tamil language in the form of 
poetic verse in high Tamil. Every effort has been made to trans late 
them faithfully into English prose. 
 Translation has been done for the most part at Mukthi Nilayam. 
  The nadi readings often contain different levels of meaning. Sri 
Vasantha Sai helped clarify the subtle or hidden meanings in places 
and added footnotes. 
 Sri Vasantha Sai said, “We can see how each sage has written the nadi 
according to his angle of perception.” Swami told her in meditation, 
“Who can know the Truth of the Primal Soul?” 
 Some sections of the nadis have been edited to benefit the reader’s 
understanding to the greatest degree possible. Occasional annotations 
have also been added in this regard. 
 To fully appreciate the subtle meanings of these nadis, the books of Sri 
Vasantha Sai should be read in chronological order. They are 
themselves nadis recorded by God. 

At this critical juncture in world history, Sri Sathya Sai Baba instructed Vasantha 
Amma to take these readings and release them as a book. Now, Sri Sathya Sai Baba has 
begun to appear in physical form in front of devotees. This is the sign of the times and is 
fulfilling the prophecies contained herein. Let the world rejoice and pray for His 
immediate blessed return and the successful completion of this great Avataric task of 
liberation for all. Let there be peace on earth and goodwi ll between all people and all 
nations! Sai Ram.  
 
PROLOGUE  
Dear Readers,  
A word before you begin reading this book . After you have read the nadis, you will 
understand why.  
 Why make these nadis public now?  
Bhagavan Sri Sathya Sai Baba is not an ordinary Avatar. All think that He has left 
His body. Not only ordinary people, but also those who were close to Him think in this 
way. It is true that He has ‘left the body’. However, it is also true that He will com e again 
with the same form. This is something that never happened in any of the previous 
Avatars. Did this happen in the lives of Rama and Krishna? No. Rama lived as an 
ordinary Prince. He made the cursed Ahalya into a woman again and destroyed all the 
demons. He performed many deeds that could not be performed by the kings of that 
time.  
Krishna also performed many actions, which were beyond the capabilities of 
humans. In His childhood, He killed many asuras and protected all the villagers from 
the anger of Indra by lifting the Govardhana Hill. He turned the hunchback Kubja into a 
beautiful woman. He brought back to life His Guru’s son who had been dead for twelve 
years. Immediately, upon entering life, He established His God state through many 
wonders. In one night, He built a new city, Dwarka and moved all of the Yadava clan 
there from Mathura. Krishna revealed His Viswaroopa on the battlefield of Kurukshetra.  
Swami is like a thousand Ramas and a thousand Krishnas in one form. He can do 
anything! He can l eave one body and come in another. If He can return the life of His 
Guru’s son, after the boy had been dead for twelve years, can He not come in a new body 
after He has left the old one for 6 months? This will now happen. It is this that is told in 
both my and Swami’s nadis.  
When Swami was in the hospital, I was crying and wailing, unable to bear the 
suffering. Swami consoled me at this time and wrote many things here. I did not know 
that Swami had left the body. SV told all in the ashram not to tell me, a s I would be 
unable to bear it. I do not have any connection with the world outside the ashram. 
Finally, SV, very slowly and gently told me what had happened. Unable to bear the news, 
I began to cry inconsolably. The pain and suffering I underwent was like  that of one 
suffering the pain of death. I cried, ‘Why has my life force not left this body!’ It is only 
then Swami said, “If my life force had gone, yours would also have gone. I have not left 
My life force, only the body.” Swami’s body left, so my body suffers more. This is what 
was shown; Swami is still here.  
As Swami could not bear my suffering, He Himself wrote that SV should go and see 
the nadis. SV left immediately, saw some nadis and called me. He said that all the nadis 
tell that Swami will come again. It is through this news, that SV gave my life force back 
to me. SV has been brought by Swami for our mission. SV found many nadis, which all 
confirmed what Swami had told me in meditation; He would return.  
The man who read the nadis then called SV again and said that the same thing was 
written in both Swami’s nadi and mine. After hearing this, SV went back in late July and 
read more of Swami’s nadis. All these nadis reveal the same; Swami is coming.  
Let us see how the ‘habit’ of seeing nadis came a bout. My father was a Gandhian 
and a great devotee. When I was born, he said that a horoscope was not necessary for 
those who had faith in God. If they had the grace of God then what could the nine 
planets do? Thus, no one in our house had a horoscope. He felt that the planets could 
not harm those who were devoted to God.  
After reading my first book, a devotee from Anantapur by the name of Krishna 
Murthy came, took all the details of my birth and had my nadi read in Anantapur. He 
then took the reading and went for Swami’s darshan in Puttaparthi. He showed it to 
Swami in darshan, who took it from him. Krishna Murthy then said to Swami that he 
wanted it back. Swami then gave it back to him. Swami blessed and returned it to Him. 
He telephoned me and told me what happened and sent the nadi to me.  
He then went to Chennai to consult another nadi. In this nadi, it told that he 
should first go to Tirupati, only then could the nadi be read. He then told us to come to 
Chennai to be there at the time of the reading. S V and I travelled to Chennai as 
requested. After this, SV had my nadi read in Madurai and Palani. He saw many nadis.  
After we moved to the ashram in 2002, Swami asked us to construct the Stupi. In 
2003, Swami told us to consult the nadis. There are partic ular nadis for temple 
construction. We consulted this nadi. A total of six readings came showing step by step 
how to construct the Stupi. In the nadi, it also tells that the Stupi pillar is my Kundalini. 
It also mentioned the eternal bond between Swami and  me, the purpose of Mukthi 
Nilayam, the Mukthi Stupi and this Avatar. In 2004, we saw a nadi in Coimbatore that 
clearly showed what the connection and relationship is between Swami and me.  
It was at the time of consulting the nadis for the first time in 1 998, that Swami 
asked me to write my second book ‘Liberation Here Itself Right Now Pt.2’. After the 
book was finished, we went to Puttaparthi, as we wanted Swami to sign the second book, 
as He had done for the first. A person phoned someone in Puttaparthi,  who told he 
would help us. We went to see him and showed him all the nadis. He told us to come 
back the next day. He then took the nadis to the Ashram Administrator. The 
administrator called me and told me not to enter Prasanthi Nilayam again. I then forg ot 
about the nadis and began to write many books. Some time passed and we again went 
inside Prasanthi Nilayam. It was at this time, Swami would take each chapter, letter and 
a copy of each new book released. 
 When I wrote, ‘Last 7 Days of God’, Swami took this book with His own hand. 
Seeing this, the administration again called me and told me not to come inside any 
more. When I was inside the office, they showed me the nadis from 1998. After this, I 
cried and suffered more. I was not able to stop my tears. SV again went to see the nadis 
2008. Then in 2009, the nadi for the Universal Clock came.  
In 2010, Swami drew a picture of a Gopuram and asked us to build a temple. He 
told us to consult the Kagabujandar Nadi for temple construction, as we had done for 
the Stupi. These were the nadis describing the Vishwa Brahma Garbha Kottam.  
This year, 2011, as I was crying and suffering more, Swami sent SV to read the 
nadis. During the period Swami was in the hospital and in the months after He left the 
body, many of both my and Swami’s nadis were seen. Swami even wrote that we should 
go and see the Bhrigu Nadi. We saw this and many others.  
This is how all the nadis in this book have come. Swami asked me to publish this 
book, so that no one should think that Swami is j ust an ordinary man who died. Do not 
think this. He is the Avatar. He is beyond all; He is the Primal Soul. He is not like the 
Rama or Krishna Avatar. Swami is the Poorna Avatar, a combination of ten Avatars in 
one form. The task of His Avatar cannot be co mpleted in one incarnation, so He comes 
with many names. He came as Shirdi Baba in one form. He then came as Sathya Sai in 
three forms and will finally come as Prema Sai. Thus, He finishes this greatest of Avatars 
by taking five bodies. If He had to comple te the task in a single form, it would take more 
than three hundred years! Thus, He comes and separates Himself in five forms and 
completes His Avataric task.  
The nadis for the Stupi and the Vishwa Brahma Garbha Kottam also reveal the 
relationship between  Swami and me, the reality of our identity.  I have written five 
volumes on the future life of the Prema Sai Avatar. The nadis also tell something of this 
life. In the recent book ‘Avatar’s Secret’ Pt. 3, I revealed more details of the future life of 
the Av atar. I wrote that in the Prema Sai Avatar, Shiva and Shakthi will descend in 
different forms and be both Swami’s and my parents.  
Now, a recent nadi tells the same; ‘Lord Shiva and Parvathi Devi come as my 
parents in the Prema Sai Avatar’. I have also wri tten recently that in the next birth I will 
not have any large intestine. I will not eat food. In Idaikadar’s Siddha Nadi, he tells the 
same in an indirect way. He tells that an organ in my body will be missing from birth. 
He says that this is to show my God state.  
Again, I have written in the book, ‘Last 7 Days of God’, that my body will become a 
jyothi and merge in the physical form of Swami. He will then also leave, disappearing in 
the Chitravathi River. Those who have come with me will follow Him and m erge at the 
same time. This is what I have written now. The rishis and siddhas have written the 
same thousands of years ago. All of them tell in Swami’s and my nadi, how we will 
disappear and how we will return again in the Prema Sai Avatar. They reveal on ly a few 
lines of the future, whereas I have written five volumes. In the same way, the nadis from 
1998 tell what was important then. Only now has the expansion come and a greater 
revelation.  
Rukmini from Hyderabad sent some predictions she had read on th e internet by 
Sage Shri Veera Brahmam Garu on Veera Bhoga Vasantha Raya. It tells that God will 
come as Kalki Avatar. We took a printout and found on the tenth page Swami had drawn 
something on one of the paragraphs,  
With the start of Margashira Shuddha Navami 
Many strange things will spread 
Within Margashira Shuddha Purnima 
The Lady’s (earth) burdens will be finished 

Here it tells that many strange things will happen by the full moon in the month of 
Margolis. This is the ninth month and falls at the beginning of December to the 
beginning of January. It is at this time the burdens on Mother Earth will come to an 
end. Th e full moon day this year, 2011, is on the 10 th December. In the next verse* 
indicated by Swami, it reads, 
Time will fruit to people in future 
In Karthika month, they would have 
Balachandra’s shine would not be visible 
The Sun’s glow would be low 
This year, 2011, the Tamil month of Karthik is from 17 November to the 16 
December. 
   VS 
 
* Additional notes by Amma on these verses are included at the end of the book.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

☪    @  
    9    
 
1 
 
 
AGASTHYA MAHA SHIVA NADI 
Date: 6 October 2008 
Place: Coimbatore 
Reading of Sri Sathya Sai Baba  
Sage Agasthya who tells this nadi first asks for the blessings of Brahma, Shiva and 
Vishnu. Agasthya will now begin to tell the nadi of Bhagavan.  
Swami’s thumb print denotes He has the Shakthi Rekha and is the embodiment of 
Jnana. As He has the nine planets on His hand, they become His slaves. He is born to a 
good father and mother. He is in the state of being born as a human, but assumed a 
Divine form. He is born in the year Akshaya. Though there are twelve months, He chose 
the month of Karthika as the month of His birth. This is the holy month when the gods 
are worshipped with deepam.  
Swami is born on a 8 th day at the time of Brahma Murtha. His star is 
Thiruvatharai. His parents alone know the secret behind His birth. The feet, which 
touch Mother Earth, have the divine symbols of conch and chakra and on His chest 
there is the divine mark. He was blessed by the sound of Omkar arising in Space at the 
time of His birth. He was born with the blessing of Lord Vishnu under the protection of 
Adi Sesha.  
In His previous birth, He was born as the blue one, the child who ate butter. At 
that time, Adi Sesha sang lullabies to Him. Now, His parents alone know that He was 
born with blue colored skin. When others saw, His skin color changed to an ordinary 
hue. What is the reason?  
This Avatar has come in Kali Yuga to live amidst the people as a mortal. It is only 
at the last stages, that He will reveal His complete form. It is  at this time He will 
complete His task. Until then He will live as an ordinary human being. In His young age, 
although He had the power to teach His teacher, He listened to his words. He had the 
power to cure illnesses from His young age. This is His natu re. However, some thought 
and some may think that He has an unstable mind; the harsh words of such people may 
have caused harm to Him.  
The name given to His human form was Sathya Narayana. Later, after His form 
began to reveal His divinity, He became Swam i, Sathya Sai. He is born in a family with 
brothers and sisters, yet was completely detached. This is because He had to reveal His 
☪    @  
    9    
 
2 
 
Total divinity. He is the only God to come in Kali Yuga that can perform the three tasks 
of Creation, Sustenance and Destruct ion, together. Those who think of Him receive His 
immediate blessings and grace, appearing in front of them in a different form. This is to 
fulfill His duty to them. His body may appear as a physical body to others, yet, His Atma 
merges in the Atma of thos e who intensely think of Him. It is in this way, He removes 
their sufferings.  
According to this nadi reading, His birth remains a secret. In His previous birth as 
Krishna, He fulfilled all His duties to mankind. He has come in all His previous births as 
Avatar of Lord Narayana. This Avatar is a complete incarnation. In all His previous 
Avatars, He came with His Divine Consort. In the previous Avatar, Krishna gave the 
boon to His consort that He will be born in the next Avatar fully in thoughts of her.  
He is the reincarnation of Lord Krishna, who has taken birth with a mission to 
vanquish the evil in Kali Yuga. He is God born to bestow good things on the good and 
transform the evil. He is born to rescue the down trodden, however, it is only when He 
unites with His consort, will the task be fulfilled. Until now, He has not been fully united 
with her. According to this nadi reading, He will meet her in the month of Karthika after 
He completes His 83 year and enters His 84 th on the auspicious day of Karthika deepam. 
It is only after this meeting with this Divine Consort will a great transformation come on 
this earth. It will be such that a dry river bed will flood, barren earth will become fertile. 
Those with evil thoughts will turn good. The situation will develop in such a way that the 
people will become pious like at the time of Radha and Krishna. A huge part of this 
transformation will only be due to the wholehearted and conscious recognition of the 
one who was Radha in her previous incarnation.  
The task of destroying evil has not been fully completed by this Avatar. It will only 
be finished when the ‘husband and wife’ unite. The two are now separate, like the North 
and South Pole. Whenever they see each other, it is only for a brief moment. Yet, both of 
them have the conviction that they will unite one day. This will happen on the day of 
Karthika deepam. On that day, this divine lady will arrive at the house of Swami and He 
will accept her as His consort in front of assembled devotees. He will declare “we are  
Radha and Krishna of Dwapara Yuga come again.” 
 These words will travel all over Tamil Nadu, India and the world, to wherever 
people live. From that day onward the life of these Avatars and the lives of those who 
worship them will enjoy prosperity. At the  age of 85 -86 onward, Swami will be 
worshipped in the manner people worshipped Krishna, when He was alive in Dwapara 
Yuga. However, it is only when He joins His consort will He find a place in the hearts of 
the wicked.  
Not all accept that He is the Avatar  in this current state of separation. At the age of 
84-85 even the wicked will accept; thereafter, the world will be free from the clutches of 
evil. During His 85 th year when They prevail as Universal Father and Mother, evils like 
unforeseen death, bomb blasts will reduce. The moment one utters the Moola mantra of 
☪    @  
    9    
 
3 
 
Sathya Sai Baba, ‘Om Sri Sai Ram’, both the Divine Mother and Father will assume one 
form or another and rush to help those in need. This will be fulfilled from the day of 
Karthika Deepam. The lamp lit on this date will last as long as earth exists. 
The memories of past birth, the yearning as to when they will unite, now lingers in 
both their minds. At this time, they have openly told people who they are, however, 
people do not believe or accept it . Swami knows when it will be accepted by the people. 
That is the day of Karthika Deepam, the month of Karthik. In the place where Swami 
resides, Adi Sesha has also assumed a form and renders service to the Lord, as His 
armour.  
According to this nadi, the  one who is born as Radha in earlier birth has taken 
birth again in the Pandiyan Kingdom as Vasantha. She has assumed the name Vasantha, 
to bring Spring into the lives of the people. Even though she was married and bore 
children, irrespective of how she go t married and lived a family life, she is an eternally 
pure and pious woman. Considering her husband as the sole God in existence, she is 
ever in the thoughts of Sai Baba in both the waking and sleep states.  
She will earn the grace of her husband on day o f Karthika deepam. Wiping her 
tears of joy, He will render all kinds of assistance to her. Karthika deepam will be the 
day on which they will unite as husband and wife mentally, spiritually and 
wholeheartedly. They will become accepted in the hearts of all  people. Until this date, 
Swami will appear in her meditation, appear in assumed forms and bestow His grace on 
her. 
The nadi reading has already declared 2,000 years ago that the Avatar will come in 
Kali and destroy the evil forces. This form has come as S ai Baba, who is born with the 
auspicious signs of conch and chakra. Like Sri Krishna, He is born again to the lullaby of 
Adi Sesha; there is no death for this form of Sathya Sai Baba. Even if the body is gone 
His Atma will exist as long the earth exists. H is Atma will pervade every individual until 
they exist. His mantra ‘Om Sri Sai Ram’ will be accepted by all religions.  
The very task of the Avatar’s birth in Kali is to destroy the evil forces. He has come 
to purify the minds of the people and bring prosp erity. If the question is asked, ‘has the 
Avatar completed His task’? The answer is no. It will only be completed when He joins 
His consort. Only when the Father and Mother unite will the children benefit. All the 
people of the world are their children. If  the parents are separate, the development of 
the child will be stunted, it will not prosper. Only on the day when Swami proclaims, 
“She is My other half, she is a part of Me” will the world change. From that day onward, 
evil will be destroyed; evil and ev il doers will be completely transformed. The bad 
thoughts filling the minds of all will cease to appear. The Sai Avatar has come to make 
thieves into good people. 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
4 
 
 
KAGABHUJANGAR NADI 
Date: 24 May 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Sathya Sai Baba  
This is Swami’s Nadi. Om Maha Ganapathi Namah, Om Namo Naraynaya, I will 
now begin the reading of Sri Sathya Sai Baba. This entire universe is called Andam; the 
body called pindam. All are Mother’s Creation. I bow down to you and I am telli ng this 
nadi. I bow down at Shiva’s and Parvathi’s feet. Now, I will begin.  
Bhagavan Sri Sathya Baba is an Avatar of Shirdi Baba. He descended here in Kali 
Yuga to remove the sufferings of the world’s people. It is for this reason He is born from 
Easwaramma’s womb on Chaturti and descended under the Thiruvathirai Star. He came 
here and built many hospitals and educational institutes. Those who come to Him are 
like patients and He the Doctor, blessing them. He is Nithya Brahmachari. He knows the 
60 arts. He  taught subtle wisdom and knows many siddhis. Through the many yagnas 
He performed, He saved the world from Kali Yuga’s destruction. He bestowed wisdom, 
showered His grace and showed the path of meditation. He has given the charity of 
water and food to man y. His name and fame spread in eight directions. His wise 
teachings are known by many in different countries in the world.  
He descended in Kali Yuga as Truth, to save the world from destruction. He came 
in a physical form and preached many subtle truths. After He left His physical body, He 
went to the heavens. Yet, this is not death; it was not the time for Him to die. He came 
here to remove destructions, so left the physical body and went to Swarga (Heaven). 
There He showered His grace on the 9 planets, the devas and the celestial army.  
In southern India in the Pandiyan Kingdom of Madurai, lives the Springtime 
Mother, Vasantha Sai. She has written many books filled with wisdom through which 
her teachings flow. In the month of Karthika, on the dark day of the New moon, 
Thursday, 8 th, in Prasanthi Nilayam where He has performed many yagnas, a big light 
will emerge and enter the body of Vasantha Sai. It is from this time the name of 
Vasantha Sai will be known there.  
Here, all know of Swami and are singing Hi s glories. On this day, wherever you 
look the wind and rain will come. Then Swami will come in His form in Andhra Pradesh 
in Prasanthi Nilayam. In the same month of His birth on the day of the Thiruvathirai 
Star. Swami attained Moksha, but did not attain i t and is living here only.  All this is 
☪    @  
    9    
 
5 
 
being told to Amma’s Avatar son, Venkatraman, and given through Him. Bhagavan 
comes in a human form to remove the sufferings and sorrows of all. Finally, Amma, 
Venkatraman and all people will attain mukthi with Swami.  When Bhagavan leaves the 
world along with His Devi, they will merge as jyothis with all devas, saints and siddhas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sage Kagabhujandar 
☪    @  
    9    
 
6 
 
 
 
RAJA RISHI VISWAMITRA NADI 
Date: 25 May 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Sathya Sai Baba  
Raja Mahar ishi Viswamitra offers worship to Shiva and Parvathi and gives the 
general Kaandam reading for Swami. He is Madhava, coming in another form of 
Mayava*, to show Maya. At the time of seeing this nadi, His body is no longer here. Yet, 
there is some confusion.  His body is not here, yet His body is here. He will once again 
return and join the body, which He has prepared before He left His body. On the day of 
the Rohini star, the day of Krishna’s birth, He will unite with that body. Within three 
months, He will s how a vision of Himself. No one knows of Him joining with this body. 
It is at this time all on the earth will benefit. It is not possible for Him to come before 
this, as He has not established Himself in that state. Even if He were to declare this to 
the people, they would never accept Him. They do not possess the correct mentality. The 
people would insult, tease and ridicule Him. This is a testing time for Him. Thus, He will 
only give darshan at the age of 86. At this time, there will be no blemish or diff iculties 
for Him.  
He is One who has never bowed down to any, yet, will bow down to His Shakthi, 
Mukthi Nilayam Amma. ** He will then announce to the world that Amma is His 
Shakthi, His Divine Consort. Though He, Himself, is telling, again some will ridicule and 
mock Him. Still, He will assert strongly that she is Mahalakshmi who has come in 
human form and who separated from Him only. When age 86 ends and 87 begins, He 
will announce that she is His consort. At that time, all in the world will accept it and 
there will be no obstacles or blemish. When Swami is 87, Amma will go to Prasanthi 
Nilayam and be with Swami in person. He will leave His body by the age of 95 and it is 
at this time, Amma, His Divine Consort, will merge in Him. It is also at this time that  
Amma’s and Swami’s ‘son’, SV, will also leave Bhooloka.  
After two years, they will both be reborn as children. Amma is born as a child of 
Shiva and Shakthi. *** Swami will marry His sister’s daughter. Amma’s mother will be 
Swami’s elder sister. They will have one child. They will only leave Bhooloka after the 
completion of the yuga.  
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
7 
 
 
Notes:  
*Swami, Sai Baba, is referred to as Mayava in many of the nadis.  
** “He is the One who has never bowed down to any, yet, will bow down to His 
Shakthi, Mukthi Nilayam Amma.” 
 This means that Shiva descends from the Ajna chakra, to the Vishwa Brahma 
Garbha Kottam in Mukthi Nilayam; here at Mooladhara, base chakra, Shiva and 
Shakthi, Swami and I unite. It is only from here that the New Creation will begin.  
*** Swami wi ll marry His sister’s daughter. My mother will be Swami’s elder 
sister. I have written in my previous book that when I am born again Shiva and 
Shakthi will be my parents. I will marry Swami, Vishnu. It is traditionally said that, 
Parvathi is the sister of Vishnu. Thus, Vishnu marries His elder sister, who is Shakthi’s 
daughter. Shakthi or Parvathi will be my mother. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maharishi Viswamitra 
☪    @  
    9    
 
8 
 
 
SHUKA NADI 
Date: 25 May 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Sathya Sai Baba  
Saga Shuka offers worship to Lo rd Muruga. This is Swami’s Nadi. At the time of 
seeing Swami’s Nadi, both He and His parents are no longer on the earth. Shuka asks, 
‘For what reason have You taken birth on this earth in human form, when the suffering 
is so great?’ After You grew up, not all had the mentality to accept You. At the age of 51, 
a man who was with You, betrayed You like a Judas. You sent him out. It was due to 
Him that some blemish came to You; Your name was tainted. You pointed out the 
mistake to the one who betrayed You and said, ‘You have not done and neither have I, 
Kali alone is the reason’. It is because of this that people awakened and accepted You, 
coming into Your fold. It was only at this time, Your totality was revealed more.  
At the age of 55 or 56 You accepted Mother, but had to compulsorily keep her away 
from You*. Yet, this Mother is Your consort. You left the body before declaring this to 
the world. It is for this reason that You will make the same form come again. Before You 
left the body, You prepared another f orm and made it take birth. This is Your *Atma 
disciple. When this Atma Disciple leaves that form, Your Atma will enter that form at 
the time of its death. This is a medical miracle! He will enter that form and all will call it 
rebirth! At that time, He will introduce Himself, telling all who He was. At the age of 86, 
He will enter the male body then give a vision of His form. He will also reveal who His 
consort is. Again more difficulties and problems will come. However, all problems will 
be resolved by th e age of 88 for the two of them. Prasanthi Nilayam will flourish and 
prosper. He will live in the body until the age of 93. The earth will be prosperous and He 
will spread the name and fame of Mother. All will then know that Baba is Mayava Baba, 
an Incarnation. Yet, no one will know that Mother is an Avatar of Sita. It will only be 
revealed at this time. Her fame will spread at this time and she will unite with Him. She 
will finally merge in her Beloved’s chest . The two will then disappear in Space and leav e 
Bhooloka. At that time, all disciples will leave the earth, following one by one, chanting 
Ganapathi Mantram or other mantras. 
Notes:  
* It was in 1982, at Swami’s age of 55 that He gave an interview to my cousin 
brother and said of our family, ‘I am in that house, I will come to that village, not now 
but after a long time’. Saying this, Swami sent prasad for us. 
*He will enter the body of His Atma Disciple means Yoga Maya body. Swami left 
His Maya body and entered a Yoga Maya body, Atma Disciple, the sam e form. This is 
a medical miracle.  
☪    @  
    9    
 
9 
 
 
 
NARADA NADI  
Date: 25 May 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Sathya Sai Baba  
Narada Maharishi: This is Swami’s Nadi, ‘Om’. Narada begins by offering worship 
to Saraswathi Devi. Narada, tells that  this is his God’s, Lord Narayana’s Nadi. These are 
Avataric secrets. What is the purpose of His decent on eart h? He came to destroy Kali 
Yuga through His love and the power of God. He came and fostered good thoughts in the 
hearts of all. It is through thi s alone that He must chase this Kali away. Yet, for this, He 
has had to suffer many insults, many bad names and many beatings. He has had to 
suffer all of these. Even as a child, many said that He was mentally unstable. However, 
He removed these thoughts f rom them by preaching the path of love and kindness and 
fostering good thoughts in all.  
Whoever came to You, You preached love to them. It was at this time and in that 
state, that You have brought prosperity to the earth. Many disciples who came to You, 
spread Your name and the teachings they heard from You. You in turn blessed them for 
their service. This is one side. Then on another side, there are some who have spread 
false rumors about You and tell of You in an incorrect way. There are many who have 
done this to You, yet, You never find fault in any.  
You have performed many types of service through the path of love. Though You 
are Ranganatha, You have performed many charitable acts. You have saved the lives of 
many. Though You have done so much, You have only won a 2% victory.  
Why have You not explained the Truth of my Mother, Mahalakshmi, when You saw 
her? You are very happy when You see her and give many explanations to her in answer 
to her yearning. Even though You have given many, many explanations  to her, You have 
not united with her. You are telling in many ways that You will give her physical 
nearness and she has written about this. Yet, You have never seen her in a happy state. 
You always gave some good news to remove Mother’s suffering, but now  You have 
disappeared. You are the Mayava who has disappeared.  
My work is to cause mischief, confusion and trouble to all. You have also acted in 
the same way to my Mother and then disappeared. You said, ‘I will declare, I will 
declare’ and then You disap peared! What is the explanation? You Yourself should 
explain! It is for this that You are now waiting for a body. You will enter a body within 
☪    @  
    9    
 
10 
 
three months and will preach to all about Yourself. This will be a very testing time for 
You. My Mother alone und erstands You. It is through her only that You will go to the 
higher states.  
It is only Amma who can prove who You are. She is the reason you become Truth. 
It is only this Mother who will tell, ‘This is Swami’ when You come again. Mayava, You 
are doing man y maya tricks. Yet, Your real state Mother alone can know and explain. 
You cannot prove Your reality. It is at this time that only Amma’s disciples will tell and 
spread the news that this is the real Swami. They will explain it to many people, this 
news reaching all. It is only at the age of 86 that Mother will touch Your body. This is the 
time prosperity will come to the world and many yagnas will be performed. Then, 
Prasanthi Nilayam and Mukthi Nilayam are one. Mukthi Nilayam will have equal fame 
to Prasanthi Nilayam. These two Nilayams will function for the well -being of all at the 
center of life itself.  
Swami is very happy to see Mother and finds ever new and intellectual ways to 
remove her sufferings. He kindles many new clever ways to try and remove h er 
suffering. Yet, though He tries to give clarity to her, it is all of no use. She will only be 
happy when she sees You. It i s only by seeing You, will she get any happiness. At the age 
of 93, Mother will unite and merge in Your chest in the state of Suma ngali (a married 
woman). All of Mother’s army will then merge one by one, following her. Rebirth is for 
sure; yet, for an explanation of this, I will only reveal in Deva Loka.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sage Narada 
☪    @  
    9    
 
11 
 
 
DEVA RISHI NADI  
Date: 25 May 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Sathya Sai Baba  
This is the Deva Rishi Nadi for Sri Sathya Sai Baba. He begins by worshipping 
Parvathi Devi and will now tell of the Sai Avatar.  
You have already seen the nadi written by Vashista telling of Swami before. I am 
telling this Deva Rishi Nadi at a time when He is no longer on this earth. How then can I 
be happy to tell when He is not here? However, two months after reading this nadi, He 
will once again descend on earth giving happiness to all. All in the world will see th is 
vision. It is only at this time that Devi’s heart will become cool and the rumbling volcano 
of suppressed emotions, ready to surge out, will be removed. It is only when Mother 
attains this that all difficulties will be removed and she will attain the hi ghest state. 
From the time of reading this nadi, for two years, there will be no real change or 
progress. Though He will give her many visions, there is no chance for them to meet 
physically. In this dark place, this is but a small light. It is only after two years that this 
testing time comes to an end and the true state will come. It will only be at that time that 
He will touch Mother; they will touch each other. It is only after these two years that 
they will both touch and talk to each other alone. It i s at this time the earth itself will 
become proud!  
The two have both descended on earth in order to achieve the highest goal, yet, 
they also must undergo a testing period. In this Mayava’s Maya, Mother undergoes great 
mental anguish, suffering and a great  volcano of inner feeling. Thus, there is no 
prosperity or well-being at this time. This will only happen after six months, when 
Mother will prosper. She will see Him within two months and be happy. Yet, a feeling of 
total peace will not come for another s ix months. Then her mind will get clarity and the 
health of the physical body improves. She will no longer suffer any bodily afflictions. It 
will only be then that Swami will be very happy.  
At the age of 88, Mayava Swami and Mother will perform a yagna to gether in 
Prasanthi Nilayam for the well-being of the world. At Swami’s age of 93, they will both 
leave their physical bodies. At that time, Mother’s body will be transformed into a light 
and merge in the chest of Mayava.  
☪    @  
    9    
 
12 
 
Another birth will follow this on e. At that time, they will descend and be 
householders, who live happy and ideal lives. In order to remove this volcano of feelings 
that Mother is now undergoing a yagna must be performed. If this is done, then she will 
have the vision of Swami’s pure imag e; the volcano of feeling will lessen and the body 
will become all right. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SRI SATHYA SAI BABA 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
13 
 
 
BOGAR NADI  
Date: 25 May 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Sathya Sai Baba  
This is Swami’s Nadi. I, Bogar, offer worship to L ord Nataraja. I will now tell Sai’s 
horoscope. He is born under Shiva’s birth star, Thiruvathirai. In there, Rahu and 
Chandra are together. This can work in two ways. One is demonic, the other divine. 
Swami came on the divine path, wisdom path. He showed l ove and kindness, embracing 
all. He attracted many hearts on earth. How much He did! He had no life as a 
householder, but lived on earth in a pure state. His consort is also born on earth. She is 
born here, but He did not accept her as His wife. It is for this that she is always filled 
with worry. To remove her worries, He made a Maya form, the same form, and came as 
her husband. Yet, she again worried and asked, “Why did I marry another?”  
It is in this way that this Mayava made a Maya trick and lived in t wo places. Yet, 
His consort did not understand this. One was in the pure state and one was with His 
wife. Swami performed many yagnas and many rituals. He was never immersed in 
family life. Yet, due to her company with Him, she became eligible to live a sp iritual life. 
This married state remains now ; it has not been removed. The marriage happened in 
accordance with social norm; children were also born. He fulfilled all His duties. He 
then removed His Maya from that body.  
Amma has no householder’s life. “Wh ere is He now?” This is her state. As Saturn 
caught hold of Swami, Mayava made some changes to His state and left that physical 
body. He must hide from Saturn. He hid from the physical body at the time when Saturn 
came in His horoscope and left the form. H e told Saturn, ‘You take My physical body. I, 
the Atma, will live outside’. Thus, He has now left the physical body.  
Though this is so, Mayava made another body in His Maya state. It is on the day of 
Rohini’s star that He will enter that body. He will the n show Himself outside three 
months later. After He comes outside, He will have peace. He will continue with the task 
as He has done for the last 85 years. Though the body will be younger, it will have the 
maturity and experience of 85 years. He comes agai n and will remain only for 7 more 
years. Many changes will happen on earth during these seven years. He comes now as a 
doctor, who will preach about the sickness in man. The form before did not know Tamil. 
The new form that comes will speak Tamil; the reas on is that Amma talks in Tamil. Yet, 
He will have the skill to know other languages.  
☪    @  
    9    
 
14 
 
He will demonstrate how long the soul that separates from a body stays in that 
state and to reunite with the same body what eligibility is needed. He will demonstrate 
whether the soul has eligibility to reunite with the soul or not.  
He will perform many daring feats to show the truth of a jeeva’s life force state. 
When the life force leaves from one body, how long it takes to join that body and what is 
its eligibility. 
It is at this time He will live with His consort and devotees together. At His age of 
93, the body of Mother, will become a jyothi and merge in His body. At this time, the 
whole world will accept this. He will show that she is Mother. After she unites with H im, 
Mayava will also leave the earth and disappear. There will be no shortcomings. In the 
next birth, the two will live together, in a state of prosperity. He will descend and 
become a doctor, who knows all the Vedas. At this time, He will not wear ochre r obes of 
a sanyasi, only white. He will have full intellect , common sense  and show the path of 
love to all. What may appear to be a pompous life is a life with His dependents. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
15 
 
 
AGASTHYA NADI 
Date: 27 May 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Sathya Sai Baba  
Goddess Parvathi prays to Lord Shiva, the one with many attributes. ‘Lord, though 
I am half of Your physical form, I am not able to understand the subtle meanings;  I have 
come here now for You to kindly explain them to me.’ 
At the time of Shiva telling this, it is Wednesday, evening time with the Sadhayam 
star. Lord Shiva is giving the details for the individual, Sathya, whose other name is 
Baba. This reading is for the one who in life had full omniscient power filled in His 
human form; He is still living. It is for Him that I am giving the reading. Sathya Sai has a 
number of ashrams, which are places rich in higher wisdom. It is to these ashrams that 
multitudes of devotees visit. Here they perform meditation, yoga and other spi ritual 
practices. Sri Sathya Sai has incarnated to perform many meritorious acts. He is the one 
who rewards those who perform good action. He is the Sadguru, but He held His Guru 
in Highest esteem. After obtaining his blessings, He Himself began living as Guru and 
performing miracles.  
The body that performed these great deeds and the body that all have seen so far is 
not His real body. It is a Maya body. At this time, when He has left His body, those 
disciples who have not ‘hated’ His wisdom are now desperate not knowing what to do.  
There is no cunningness involved in what has taken place. It is only that God 
decided Himself to take rest. It is the state of the Lord at rest.  
What is going to happen in the future as regards to His physical form? The 
circumstances in which he was surrounded were not conducive for Him to function in 
His Complete state; knowing this, He accepted this state, enjoying it. He has done this 
for the purpose of performing many wonders. This is not ordinary. This state has been 
adopted in order to perform some other miracles and wonders.  
Though the Lord has discarded His body, there is not even the slightest decrease in 
the flow of His grace. Whatever the Lord has so far declared will come to pass and will 
not change in the slightest . After Saturn enters Libra on the day of the full moon, the 
Lord will give a vision of Himself in His present form. This will be a true vision of His 
real body. It will be seen by many who will be filled with wonder and amazement. 
☪    @  
    9    
 
16 
 
However, before this won drous event takes place a few disciples maybe found to be 
entangled in claims to be the heirs to the Lord. There will be some dispute and quarrel 
as to who is in charge. Some may even claim that they themselves are the Avatar. Some 
may feel that they possess the requirements, strength and power to be the Avatar. Yet all 
these ideas are incorrect and such a thing could never happen. The descent of Sathya Sai 
Baba is the same as ten incarnations of Narayana in one.  
Lord Shiva now tells that a vision will be seen not only in India but all over the 
world. It will be the same form, but in different places. Many people will be filled with 
wonder and claim to see him here and there. In fact, He will be seen in different places 
at the same time by many people. 
Just like the one who has come to seek the reading for Sathya Sai, many others will 
come and receive blessings.  
Whatever is foretold, to whomever may come, will definitely happen. It is told now 
that the one who seeks this nadi reading has done so with the fu ll blessings of Baba. 
Whatever has been foretold for You will come to pass. Certain responsibilities have been 
entrusted to you. It is your responsibility to show the correct path. You will have to do 
more than is expected of you in order to perform these tasks. In your last moment, the 
body is a wisdom body. 
On the day of the full moon, great wonders will take place that will benefit the 
people of the world relieving them from sorrow, suffering and bestowing well -being to 
all. People will stop fighting and  quarreling and unite. I will address the next part of the 
nadi to Vasantha Sai as the Mother.  
Whatever has been revealed to her by Sathya Sai Baba will definitely take place. 
Yet there is a subtle and secret meaning to some of these events. There is poss ibility of 
two Atmas performing many wonders together. Sathya Sai Baba and Vasantha Amma 
possess the great power needed to sustain the life of the people of the world through 
taking their suffering and sorrows on their own bodies. They will visit a number of 
ashrams together guiding those who are there. These disciples will have a vision of these 
two Atmas together when sitting in meditation; many will have this vision.  
All that has been declared previously will happen before this body disappears from 
the world. It does not matter how great the sorrow has been. All will find joy when they 
see the smiling face of Vasantha Amma and when they meet her. She is the form of 
Shiva and Shakthi. She will be in such an elevated state that those in the world will look  
at her in wonder. Many will come to have their problems solved and will receive solace 
from her. In the future, her disciples in the many ashrams will have the power to help 
those in need through their inner divine guidance.  
Vasantha Amma will enter the new building at the time that is indicated to her. It 
will be after the vision of Sai Baba takes place. There are many subtle and secret truths, 
which cannot be disclosed now. They are not of an ordinary nature. There is much more 
☪    @  
    9    
 
17 
 
to be told, however, thes e will be revealed at the appropriate time and in a broader 
sense. The subtle meanings will not be disclosed. Vasantha Amma will acquire 
omniscient power. The Lord’s arrival will be preceded by a great thunderous storm. It 
may appear quite frightening, but , it will stop quite suddenly and the vision of the Lord 
will take place. From this day onwards, great wonders will increase. This ends the 
reading for the Lord. Though the end is told, more will be revealed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sri Vasantha Sai 
☪    @  
    9    
 
18 
 
 
NANDEESHWARA NADI 
Date: 14 June 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Sathya Sai Baba  
I am one who acts according to the command of Lord Shiva. Now, it is with His 
grace I am telling Mayava’s Nadi. He is born only with my Lord’s name. In His young 
age, He did not hav e any faults or shortcomings. He attained the highest state. He was 
born to His mother and father after a long time. He had many elders around Him; thus, 
all had more love for Him. His father and mother died when He was young. He was very 
good at His studi es, but desired more to perform service than to be educated. He had a 
very sharp intellect. He always told that all should respect their fellow man as human 
beings. This was His thought.  
At the age of 13, the stage changed and He had no more confusion, He  was in a 
clear state. He had the vision that He was Shirdi Baba in a previous birth. He then 
renounced His education and began to preach to all. To give the people the realization 
that He was Shirdi Baba reincarnation, He began to perform many poojas and rituals. 
Thus, many came in search of Him and He removed all their suffering and difficulties. 
He showed them what spirituality was. As a youth, His name and fame spread among 
the people. He also built a big ashram at the place of His birth. He then began to travel 
to many places. After going on these journeys, He made a Nilayam in His native  place. 
This Nilayam is like Maya Loka, like Swarga, heaven. Whoever comes inside attains 
peace and happiness.  
He is like the bright Sun, who filled all with wonder th rough the many events that 
He performed. It is at the time of the setting sun that He made many know of His 
reality. The setting sun means Amavasya, Shivarathri. It was on the day of the new 
moon and Shivarathri that He performed some Maya works proving th at He is God, 
come in human form.  
How much suffering there is in human birth! He too has undergone all this 
suffering. His clan is the cows and bulls, the cowherd clan; so He is giving charity daily. 
Thus, He has grown more and more in His power attaining the highest state.  
Now He has left His body; His Atma left the body. It is at this time the nadi has 
been read. There is also a reason for this. It is at this time that Mother has also taken 
birth, grown and lived. It is from that body, Mayava will come again. She will get a 
☪    @  
    9    
 
19 
 
vision of Mayava at His age of 85 and then from the age of 86, He will be in Mukthi 
Nilayam fully. He is God, who will then perform many poojas for the different gods. All 
He will do Himself.  
At the age of 88, due to His desire to be  with Mother, He will perform all duties for 
Mother. He will call her and give full darshan. At that time, they will talk alone together. 
The two will then round the world together. At the age of 93 years, they will leave 
Bhooloka with their soldiers. It is at this time He will reveal the details of His next birth.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
20 
 
 
GORRAKA NADI  
Date: 14 June 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Sathya Sai Baba  
I worship Lord Vinayaka and will now reveal Swami’s horoscope.  
Swami took both good and bad qualities of the planets. His star is in Medhuna rasi, 
Gemini. Here, both Moon and Rahu are together and so He had no formal education. 
Mercury is in the fifth house, which signifies the cutting of ties and relationships. In the 
sixth house is the Sun, Venus and Saturn. As Saturn is positioned here, He will have no 
enemies. Sun and Venus together tell of a Gandharva marriage , n ot an ordinary 
marriage, but a Gandharva marriage. In the seventh house is the planet Ketu, so He is 
full of wisdom  and is in the state of a sanyasi. In the eighth house is Jupiter, so He did 
not have any children. In the eleventh house is Mars, so He had brothers. They all 
reached a high level because of Swami. He was born to a good father and mother. This is 
not His last birth. He will take another birth.  
 In this birth, all know that He is the Primal God. Earlier Avatars came with some 
aspects. Swami has come in Totality. He descended to earth and was born as God. This 
is not an Avatar; this is God’s life. He took a  human body on earth to show God on a 
human level. This was His destiny. He has so much love that He will take all to the God 
state.*  
He has taken birth to show the life principle. At the time of taking this nadi, He is 
in the Atmic state. There is no lan guage, no body. The Atma cannot speak. Therefore, as 
He has no body, He will speak through His thoughts. He has no earthly body. He will 
come again to earth. He will come again and reach earth. That is His destiny. Sixty days 
from today, He will come into another state. All mountains are on Shiva’s head. Shiva 
has conquered all the mountains. So He resides in the south Kailaya state. Kailaya 
means Shiva’s highest state. That is His Nilayam, Mukthi Nilayam. He has come to the 
south Kailaya state.  
Swami left the body, but the people on earth are still thinking about Him. At the 
age 88, people on earth will accept Him without doubt, blemish or shortcoming. He will 
live for 7 years. He will perform a big yagna with the blessings of the five elements. 
Then, He w ill travel to all places. Not only India, but He will cross seas to the foreign 
lands. He will do all this for 7 years. In the seventh year, His consort in Mukthi Nilayam 
☪    @  
    9    
 
21 
 
will merge into Him. His Atma will then separate and He will also leave. He will take  all 
His devotees with Him, like going on a journey together. After two years, He will again 
take human birth. In that birth, He will have a child.  
 
Notes: 
*Swami is not just an ‘Avatar’; He is ten Avatars in one. He descended and was 
born as the total an d complete Avatar.  This means that He is the Primal Source. He 
has come to show people the life principle and take all to the God state.  
 

Om Sri Sai Ram 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
22 
 
 

☪    @  
    9    
 
23 
 
 
AGASTHYA MAHA SHIVA NADI  
Date: 26 November 1998 
Place: Anantapur 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
In the name of Sri Vasantha, this Palm leaf was read out on 26-11-1998. 
This is  a conversation between Lord Shiva and Goddess Parvathi. Parvathi asks 
and Shiva replies:  
Date of birth : 23rd October 1938, Vegudhanya year. On 26 -11-98, 60 years h ave 
been completed. 61st year is running. She is expecting to have the same merging state as 
Andal. She does meditation and will get benefit in that. Before she reaches 62 -63 years 
of age, she will get its benefits. She will get a great name in the world. When she is 63 -
65, a person with spiritual interests, by name Krishnamurthy will be benefited by her. 
Because of this, his family and other families will be helped. 
63-65 years of age: her name and fame will spread at the regional level. She will 
not have any liking for money or wealth or jewels, but they will start to come. They will 
not attract her and she will not care for them. 
She will have a very dedicated disciple until the end. This disciple’s name will be 
related to the name of  Sri Krishna. She wil l render a  lot of help to this disciple in the 
future. 
70-72 years: God’s grace, blessings and help would be available in abundance. 
Whatever she undertakes will be successful. For the benefit of the world, she will 
embark on long distance traveling. She w ill get the blessing of the Lord and the Guru 
Peetam. 
72-74 years: Some minor troubles may arise and disappear. 
75-76 years: She will achieve whatever she wants. Her Husband’s help will be there 
until the end. She will not be interested in family life anymo re. Through dhyana 
(meditation), she will attain the status of a great goddess. 
75-80 years: Her life span is quite good. 
She, like Andal wants to merge with God. Parvathi asks Lord Shiva “Will it 
happen”? 
☪    @  
    9    
 
24 
 
“Yes, she will merge with an Avatar by the name , Sai Baba. She has no more 
births,” replies Lord Shiva. 
Her previous birth name was Radha, born during the time of the Pandavas. She 
loved Lord Sri Krishna. She attempted to attain Him. In that birth, as some desires were 
unfulfilled she has taken this birth . In the previous birth, she prayed, “If I were to be 
born again, I should merge with Lord Sri Krishna” – this was the boon she wanted. 
Therefore, she is now born again and will merge with Sri Krishna with this body itself. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sage Agasthya 
☪    @  
    9    
 
25 
 
 
AGASTHYA NADI  
Date: 12 December 1998 
Place:  Palani 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
During the current period, only divine service will prevail. This will be closely 
followed in succession of higher and more noble services, Amma will rise to greater 
glories; no hindrances.  The path of spirituality is the best path. She is likely to perform 
many great things on a grand scale. People will be filled with wonder on seeing her 
various sadhanas. 
62-63 her services would be very praiseworthy. She will reach a higher and higher 
state of purity. Her activities will all be full of Prema and excellent. She will reveal 
wonders to the world. She will grant amazing visions to her devotees. She has become 
one with Baba. She will render highly useful public service. She will solve the probl ems 
of others and make them happy. She will also be immersed in Ananda. She has an 
excellent Vaksiddhi. Whatever she says will come true; it will never fail. She also has a 
large number of Shakthis in her command.  
Though here and there may be a few minor problems, she will easily overcome all 
of them. She will be very munificent and benevolent. She will be working in a very 
efficient manner. She will redeem several families helping them magnanimously. She 
will grant them her grace and wealth. She will bles s them always. The negative rule of 
the planets and the action of destiny may occasionally show up , but will be driven away 
because of her life of renunciation and detachment. All are overcome and run away. 
When she realizes her greatness, others will also. 
People will understand her greatness. Her powers would increase because of her 
tapas. She will have one good disciple whose name will be one of Sri Narayana’s. He will 
spread her glory. Amma’s teachings and blessings will be encouraging to him; but he 
also would encounter problems and soon will get redeemed from them. 
Amma knows her previous birth. She will give darshan to thousands of people. She 
will attain a blissful state. Serving others is her duty. She will render service as if she is 
the disciple o f the disciples. She will perform something novel, not known or heard of 
heretofore. This will bring immense happiness to others related or known to her. She 
☪    @  
    9    
 
26 
 
will formulate this novel method in such a way that everyone could easily follow it. 
Those who follow it will live in perfect happiness in family life. 
Before she attains the age of 61 years, she will get the love and affection of a great 
sage, but she will not be carried away by all that happens. She will still remember her 
simple life and use the mon ey only for the development of ashram and welfare of the 
others. She would always lead a very simple life, carved out for herself by her. 
She will have one disciple who will follow her path strictly; she would give 
upadesha to him and grant him visions. In  future, she will also solve his problems. The 
disciple would have a name connected to Lord Vishnu. 
She will have an ashram during 62 -65 years. With the help of devotees and the 
disciple, charitable activities will take place there. Annadhana (distribution of free food) 
would be a main activity. She will grant visions to devotees. By her grace and speech, she 
will solve their problems and make them happy.  
She would derive happiness in such activities; she will develop overseas 
connections. With the help of devotees, the divine services will be continued. 
She will get powers equal to God. She will give “Jnana upadesha” (spiritual 
instruction). She will write another book on spirituality. She will get the vision of Shiva 
and Shakthi. Her later years will be spent in the worship of Shiva and Shakthi. 
She will be able to foretell events. She will possess the power of Vaksiddhi. It will 
be wonderful and will make her famous. She will have many Shakthis at her command. 
Devotees from overseas will gather around her . They will also have their problems 
solved by her. Her activities will be stunning to others. She will save several families 
from catastrophe. During this period with the help of the government, she will start a 
trust and she will manage it herself. 
At 65-70 years with total renunciation, she will lead the life of an ascetic and be in 
the company of them. She may also travel to places along with them. Once she may have 
an opportunity to go into Yoga nidra. In that stage, she will function not knowing what 
she does. Others will be happy to see this and for them it will be awe-inspiring. 
At this point of time, she will have ashrams at two places; one amidst a grove at a 
suburban location in natural surroundings. She will lead the life of a Siddha, a perfected 
soul. She will not go to any temple. She will have darshan of all gods at her own place. 
People of various other countries will worship her also. 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
27 
 
 
AGASTHYA MAHA SHIVA NADI  
Date:  14 December 1998 
Place: Madurai 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
Maha Shiva Nadi - Parvathi asks Shiva and Shiva communicates thus: 
65-66 years: Ashram will come up at two places. Then she will be in a suburban 
location in the midst of a garden in natural surroundings. She will lead the life of a 
Siddha. She will not go out, but will attract God to her place and worship Him there. She 
will get the company of many gurus. 
67-68-69 years: People from many countries will offer their pranams to her. She 
will give divine readings. In other countries, organizations will come up in her  name. 
She will travel to other countries. The government will also be favorable to her and the 
officers of the government will be friendly and courteous to her continuously. 
70-75 years: Nothing to complain. Though some people may create hindrances to 
her divine services, they will go on uninterrupted. 
Longevity is greater than 77 years. She will become capable of understanding the 
languages of organisms like ants and birds also. 
There will be big spiritual recognition of her true form and identity. In rec ognition 
of this, she may come to be known as Vasantha Veda Nayaki and Shivanamma. 
 
 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
28 
 
 
AGASTHYA NADI 
Date: 15 December 1998 
Place: Madurai 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
Mother Vasantha - 9th Kaandam: Dhyana and service will continue. Baba would 
give His grace and blessings and guide her. 
She will be giving deeksha to a number of people. She will have the grace of Sri 
Krishna. She will give Jnana upadesha to disciples. She will render public service also. 
People will be amazed at her capabilities and her Vaksiddhi. 
63-64 years: Ashram and service to the people; name and fame. She will get 
assistance from foreign countries and more branches of ashrama will develop. A number 
of Dharmasalas (charitable organizations) will come up around 69 years. Still obst acles 
will come and service continues. 
67-69 years: Many great persons will receive blessings from Amma. 
70-72 years: She will give Jnana upadesha. Many will be yearning for her 
blessings. Whatever she says will come true (Vaksiddhi). She has the divine gr ace of all 
the gods and goddesses. She reaches a very high state and will in the end attain moksha. 
12th Kaandam: She will attain a powerful speech and ultimate jnana. She will get 
the darshan of Goddess Sri Ambika and a merger with God similar to Andal, b ut at the 
level of the spirit. 
63-65-67 years: There will be single -pointed devotion. Good medita tion, power of 
blessing, jnana and contentment of mind are all at her command. She will have a good 
life till the end when she attains Moksha. She has no rebirth. She will attain Kaya siddhi, 
the highest state in the physical body. 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
29 
 
 
 
MAHA SHIVA NADI  
 
Date:  December 1998 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
Whatever she says to others will come true. So to that extent, she w ill attain 
siddhis. Because of this, she will get name and fame. She will be healthy. 
At the end of 61 years quite unexpectedly, she will get the love and friendship of a 
great soul. 
Because of the love and affection of Him, money will come but she would n ot be 
interested in it. She may donate it. She will render service to others as if she were their 
humble servant. She will do it as her duty. 
She will do what others have not done so far. By doing this, not only she, but 
others also will become extremely h appy. Whatever she does, others can easily follow it 
and many families will get benefited. 
62-65 years: Though money comes in, she thinks only of simplicity. She will not 
enjoy anything. She will gift it to others in service and thus, she will create a sui table 
atmosphere for this kind of life. 
64-65 years: A change of place will occur so that her name will spread. 
Her family also will be prepared to render services to others and all will be happy 
performing such. 
Not only every year, but every day people will be rushing to her. They will help her. 
There will be a trust started with the help of the government. It will be under her name. 
After 65 years, she will completely sever connection with her family and take to a 
life of an ascetic. Several friendships in that line will develop and she will undertake 
pilgrimages in the company of those who have renounced. Then she will get some rest 
unexpectedly, but this will not last long. She will have a disease-free life, healthy life and 
will go into Yoga nidra at a  place. She may not know what she is doing at that stage. 
Others will be stunned by it. They will all be extremely happy to experience this. 
70 years: When all her children are with her, she will bless them all with her grace. 
72-75 years: Through her writing, she will give great divine readings. She will know 
her end in advance and she will specify the date and time and help others. 
☪    @  
    9    
 
30 
 
 
 
SHUKAR AGASTHYAR NADI  
Date: 4 April 1999 and on 30 April 1999 
Place: Chennai 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
1. By the grace of Bhagavan Sri Sathya Sai Baba, Vasanthamma will be blessed with 
a great spiritual life. Amma will get all His spiritual powers. She will guide the present 
day spiritual world like a great Queen. For His spiritual empire, Sathya Sai is shining 
like the Emperor. 
2. All the people will worship her as a Goddess. 
3. Her spiritual powers will benefit the entire humanity. She will be involved in the 
establishment of Dharma. 
4. Just as a son has a right to the property of his father, just as the wife has a right 
to the property of her husband, Vasanthamma will inherit, take on, the spiritual 
qualities of Sathya Sai Baba. 
5. Her spiritual life, activities and leelas will be published as books. 
Shukabrahma Rishi has said that the person, Mr. Krishnamurthy, who is see king 
the reading, should go to Tirupati and worship Lord Venkateshwara. After that, he can 
then come to Chennai on 30 -04-99 to review the remaining pages of Jnana Kaandam. 
That is part-2 “Jnana Kaandam.” 
Jnana Kaandam part 2: The palm leaves were taken on 30-04-99 at 2 pm. 
1. Vasanthamma has already obtained the grace of Sri Sathya Sai Baba. She can 
have a darshan of Baba anytime and whenever she wishes. She can understand and has 
understood all spiritual truths through her Guru Sri Sathya Sai Baba. 
2. Vasanthamma during her 62 -63 years of age in meditation will acquire divine 
powers. She will know the truth of the seven chakras of the body.  
3. Vasanthamma knows the full details of the history of the next Avatar, Prema Sai 
Baba. 
4. By the grace of Baba, Amm a will have Poorna Vak Siddhi; that is, whatever she 
says will happen and must happen. 
☪    @  
    9    
 
31 
 
5. She will have the darshan of great yogis, sanyasis and sadhus. She will talk to 
them and get their wise counsel. 
6. Vasanthamma will undertake pilgrimages. Wherever s he goes, she will get the 
grace and blessings of the gods and goddesses there. In her 65th year, she will get the 
grace of Adi Parashakthi. She will also get Her divine powers. 
7. At 65 years, she might come across some troubles because of her opponents, b ut 
Bhagavan’s grace will solve everything. Ultimately, her opponents will also be drawn 
into the spiritual current. 
8. All people of the world will worship her as Sathya Sai Himself. They will also 
worship her as Adi Parashakthi. She will have many devotees all over the world. She will 
give initiation to a number of devotees. 
9. She will organize and construct a number of temples and ashrams and 
organizations, which would help the poor. Her important activity is Annadhana (free 
food). 
10. Happiness and sorrow would never affect Amma. She will always be immersed 
in eternal bliss. 
11. Amma will get the great Kundalini power. This will open the 7th chakra, the 
Sahasrara and she would attain Kapala Moksha (liberation). 
12. She will have the darshan of the Trimur this and their powers of creation, 
protection and destruction will also come under her control. 
13. She will have the darshan, blessings and powers of Saraswathi, Lakshmi and 
Parvathi. 
14. Amma will also come to know and understand the Maha Ganapathi Tatva. 
15. At the age of 68, she will get the darshan of Durga Devi as Simha Vahini and 
she will get Durga’s blessings and Her powers. For many true devotees, Amma will give 
darshan as Simha Vahini, Durga Herself. 
16. From devotees the world over, assistance an d support is offered at Amma’s 
feet. Amma will posses many strange, exceptional and unique powers. People will 
worship Amma as guru and as the Maha Shakthi Avatar. 
17. Amma will have the powers to control the five elements and Nature. 
18. By the grace of B hagavan Sathya Sai and by the blessing of great yogis, sadhus 
and sanyasis, Amma will get liberated from this world in a strange, wonderful and 
unheard of manner. 
In the presence of Bhagavan Sri Sathya Sai Baba, great yogis, sadhus and sanyasis, 
Amma’s body will get transformed into jyothi and merge with Sri Sathya Sai Baba. 
☪    @  
    9    
 
32 
 
original by Sai Divine Inspirations 
Only selected great devotees will be able to witness this merger. Those who are 
fortunate to witness this wonder themselves will also attain moksha. 
Even afterwards, several wonders and  miracles will take place. For many true 
devotees, whenever they think of her, Amma will give darshan in the form of a jyothi. 
For all devotees, in whatever form they want to worship her, she will appear in that 
form and remove all their sufferings. Whenev er her devotees think of Amma and chant 
her namas and worship her, they will get liberated from their troubles and get 
happiness.  
Om Shanthi, Shanthi, Shanthi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sri Vasantha Sai and Sri Sathya Sai Baba 
☪    @  
    9    
 
33 
 
 
KAGABHUJANDAR NADI 
Date: 11 March 2000 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu  
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
Details of the palm leaf manuscript readings of Sri Adi Shakthi. Offering pranams 
and worshipping the lotus feet of Sri Adi Shakthi, Sri Kagabhujandar Maharishi gives 
the readings of your general Kaandam. The rekha taken from he r hand is known as 
Mathipooran Shiva Bhooshana Rekha, the mark of complete wisdom. Here, there will be 
a dot in it. 
She was born in Vegudhanya year, Ipasi month, 7th day on a Sunday in Chitra 
Nakshatra Danur Lagna. 
In the third place from Lagna (ascendant) in Kumba is Jupiter. 
In the fourth place Meena (Pisces) is Saturn. 
In the fifth place Mesha (Aries) is Kethu 
In the tenth place Kanyo (Virgo) is Kuja (Mars). 
In the eleventh place Thulam (Libra) are Sun, Mercury, Moon, and Rahu. 
In the twelfth place Vrischika (Scorpio) is Sukra (Venus). 
She was born in Pandiya Nadu (Tamil Nadu) in a Reddiar community. In a good 
family, she was born as the only child. At the time of this nadi reading, her parents are 
no more. She does not have brothers or sisters. A few ite ms of property and a plot may 
be there. She may have had a reasonable basic formal education. She will not have gone 
for any employment. She will have been married and will have lived with her husband 
for a long time. She will have three children: one fema le child and two male children. 
They will all come up very well in life. When she reaches her 62nd year, it is ordained 
that she should come here and take out the palm leaves and go through the readings as 
given by Sri Kagabhujandar Maharishi today (11 March 2000). 
Her life span - over 75 years. Her husband and children also will be long lived. 
Father might have been involved in business. Male children may be employed in 
professions related to teaching or education. 
Householder Sanyasin! This is her current status for quite some time, for a number 
of years. She may be a householder, but in reality, she is only sanyas. 
☪    @  
    9    
 
34 
 
Because of the bond of earlier birth, the grace of the Guru runs in her blood! 
Therefore, she must observe spiritual austerities and lead such  a life. Whatever she says 
will come true. She has the blessings of the 9 Maharishis. Though she may not chant 
mantras nonstop, she will still get several subtle powers automatically. That is because 
of Kethu’s benedictory powers. Kethu occupies fifth plac e, the Lord of the fifth house is 
in the tenth house; that is Mars (kuja) is in the tenth house and he is governed by 
Saturn. Therefore, her life will be one of an renunciant related to ashram life. Something 
connected to temples – something very divine. I t is likely that her very house will be 
converted into an ashram where the public will come to solve their difficulties. She may 
also have occasions to live alone in God consciousness.  
The grace and blessings of Sri Shirdi Bhagavan and of Sri Shuka Brahma Rishi are 
there in her blood. Because of this, her name and fame will spread in all the eight 
directions all over the world. Now her name will be spreading in the southern direction. 
Soon, she will have connection with people in the north. 
It has been ordained that she should occupy Guru Peeta, so that a large number of 
people will come to her for guidance and direction and for worshipping her. She will 
carry out many beneficial activities. She will remove the miseries of people. Those who 
go to her ‘heart  broken’ will get all their problems solved. She will also direct them to 
spirituality and mental purification. She will reach the status of Sun Moon art, Dhyana 
art, and Pranayama Tatva. She will not feel hunger or the sensation of taste. She will live 
only on air. She considers all as her gurus and lives her life accordingly. She will lead life 
like the sages. She will have them as guru. She will attain Mukthi. This is said and 
written in the nadi.  
She will have several disciples and their number will mu ltiply. Many seers and 
sages will grant their blessings to her through meditation. They will also bless her by 
granting her yogic powers. Several ashrama poojas and worships will take place – on say 
Full Moon and New Moon days. She will become the head of an ashram. Spiritual 
activities will dominate her life. She will be called “Amma.” Vasanthamma is her name. 
Several disciples will call her ‘Amma’. She will also worship several deities – Kali and 
Raja Mathangi and Bhairavi. Her mantra and healing art will multiply greatly. 
63-64-65 Years: She may visit foreign countries and have connection with them. 
Her name and fame will spread in all the directions of the world. Disciples from other 
communities and religious faiths also will be come. But, a devotee from  Andhra region 
bearing the name of Lord Krishna will spread her name and fame in all eight directions 
and derive happiness and satisfaction from doing so. He will be her principal devotee 
and shine. She will live as a great guru.  
65-66 Years: She will expand as Jyothi swaroopa and come to know all the arts and 
skills, which are not known to anyone else. Mantra, healing arts, dhyana, transmigration 
and such other powers will be bestowed on her. She will also go on pilgrimage. She will 
have thousands of disc iples. She will have all the eight siddhis at her command. Due to 
☪    @  
    9    
 
35 
 
the grace of the eight deities who protect the 8 directions, Ashta dikpalakas, her place of 
residence will become a kamala peetam (Lotus base)* and will be visited by a countless 
number of d evotees. She will also have the darshan of a number of siddhas (realized 
souls). 
67–68 Years: Her service to spirituality will reach great heights and she will be a 
guru of several people. A great sage will bless her. She will travel widely in the north. 
69–70 Years: She may have some physical ailments, but she will have the blessing 
of Sri Shuka Brahma Rishi and Kagabhujangar Maharishi. If she offers worship, all 
problems will vanish. 
70-73 Years: Great things are likely to happen. Her name is Vasanthamma.  Her 
husband’s name is Manoharan. Her father’s name is Madhura Kavi. Her mother’s name 
is Vedavalli. 
74-75 Years: A period of great fortune. She will not die in the ordinary manner, but 
attain Mukthi in a unusual way. Attaining Ashtamaha Siddhis, she will make use of 
them for the benefit of humanity. She will spread arts, mantras, jnana, science and 
spirituality. Her siddhis will increase. She will sacrifice all pleasure and family ties and 
will be in a state of Universal Motherhood embracing all! She will take several forms. 
She will get countless disciples. Her name will be widespread. After her lifetime, the 
place where she lived will become a sacred place of pilgrimage and people will start 
flooding in to worship there. These readings of Sri Kagabhujanga r will come true 
without fail. 
 She will live up to eighty years. Her merger will be the nature of ShivaShakthi and 
RadhaKrishna* merger. She will merge with Sri Sathya Sai Baba in the form of a jyothi. 
Her place will become very holy. 
Notes:  
* The Mukthi Stupi at Mukthi Nilayam rests on a lotus base. 
* In other words, it is the union of Purusha and Prakrithi, the Lord and His 
consort. 
 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
36 
 
 
KAUSIKA TULYA NADI  
Date: 12 March 2000 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu  
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
1. Sri Amma will have great and intense devotion for Sathya Sai Baba. Swami will 
always be with her in subtle form. Her entire life will be filled with divine grace and 
blessings. She will always be in thoughts of Swami. 
2. By the grace of Bhagavan Sathya Sai Ba ba in her 62 -63 year, she will attain 
Jnana siddhi. 
3. She will reach the peak of spirituality by her intense sadhanas, japas and 
meditation and by her unique Prema Bhakthi towards Bhagavan. Because of this, she 
will be glorified by all. 
4. Bhagavan Sathya Sai Baba will give all His powers to Sri Amma. 
5. She will be widely respected and worshipped because of her selfless service and 
spiritual service by people of all countries all over the world. The people of the world will 
consider her as the Avatar of Adi Parashakthi and Sathya Sai Swaroopa. As the years roll 
by, she will be known in every nook and corner of the world. 
6. She will establish ashrams, prayer halls, meditation halls, temples and spiritual 
centers. This will be done through the generosity of  the devotees of Sri Amma. By her 
overflowing and abundant love, by her Prema Shakthi, by her wise divine counseling 
and speech, she will redeem countless people from their material life and turn them on 
to the royal road of spirituality, directing and pro viding them with proper guidance. 
Numerous bhakthas will feel immensely satisfied and happy and gain peace because of 
her spiritual seva. 
7. She will live beyond 75 years. Her last moments will be extraordinary. By her 
power of tapas and by her Yoga Shakth i, she will convert the physical body into a divine 
jyothi, pure divine light and merge in Bhagavan Sathya Sai Baba’s physical form. 
Such a Mukthi attainable by Sri Amma is known as Jnana Mukthi. There is no 
rebirth for her. This extract has been taken out  from the Jnana Kaandam of Kausika 
Muni (Sage Kausika). 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
37 
 
 
 
KAUSIKA NADI  
Date: 14 December 2004 
Place: Coimbatore 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
This nadi was written by Sage Kausika after he became a Brahma Rishi and his 
body became a light body. This nadi i s in the form of a conversation between Sage 
Vashista, Sage Durvasa and Sage Viswamitra. This part is like eyes for the whole nadi. 
Sage Viswamitra says: 
Even the desire to merge with God has to be renounced. There is no one who has 
realized your truth. Yo u are the Mother of all. Have you forgotten that you lived before 
on a mountain? 
Krishna shed tears only for two. One was for Karna, the son of the Sun God. The 
other is for you. An expert archer, Karna was Rudra’s bow form. He gave in charity the 
merits accrued for his good actions to Krishna, who came disguised as an old Brahmin. 
It was then that Krishna shed tears for him. Now in this Age, it is for you , who reside on 
the Red Lotus. 
This reading is given to you by Lord Shiva at my request. You have desc ended to 
bestow universal peace. Due to your descent, the many threats to life and bloodshed will 
decrease. There will be peace and harmony in the world.  You will play an important role 
in resolving the conflicts in many countries. Without completing your task, do not come 
near me, saying this Prema Sai is running away, hiding Himself. This is the reason why 
the Lord has kept you a little away from Him. 
 Sage Durvasa speaks: 
 Oh Mother! Once in the past, you closed the door on Krishna when you were 
Sathyabama. That day, my Lord pleaded with you to open the door, saying, “You and 
Rukmini are one and the same to Me.” Yet, this is the cause for the separation with the 
Lord now. It is temporary. Oh Mother! You are the crown jewel of women; please cool 
your anger down. You protect all, yet the Lord has directed me to guard you. You will 
have the darshan of Lord Shiva and He will accept your commands . You will also have a 
vision of the Devas. All this is due to the blessings of your husband. He will call you and 
make you sit on His Peetam. Bhagavan Sri Sathya Sai Baba is an embodiment of love 
and He lives in Parthi. All that is under Him will come under your protection. He will 
☪    @  
    9    
 
38 
 
confer all blessings on you. Oh Mother! Please be patient till then. Oh Mother Radha 
you heard all that Sage Kousika has written in his nadi, I have a small request to you. All 
said that this day would definitely come to pass. I am aware of your suffering. All your 
suffering is due to the will of this Sai, who was the charioteer of Arjuna. Bra hma Rishi 
Viswamitra and I together will pray to our Lord Sathya Sai to  remove your suffering. 
You must feed the one that reads this nadi and also those that came to listen to it. 
Sage Durvasa asks: 
 Why is it that she has to feed six people? 
Sage Viswamitra replies: 
 O realized one! She is suffering more now and is unable to express this to anyone. 
She is Mahalakshmi herself , but lives like an orphan. This nadi is intended to bring 
some consolation to her. She is also weak physically . I have written all to make her body 
strong like a diamond. She is Mother to me. I will tell the way, so all in the world will 
enjoy peace and prosperity by her grace. 
Sage Durvasa says: 
 Wait! Wait! Why is it you have not done anything so far? Why? Are you a rishi 
who let Maha lakshmi herself suffer in this way? Like Brahma, you too have let her 
suffer. Alas! You too along with that Kanna, who is called Viswamitra Priya, have closed 
your eyes to her suffering. Did you fail in your duty O Kausika? 
Sage Viswamitra replies: 
 That Saviour of the suffering tied my hands. He was happy to see her suffer. He 
that blissfully reclines on Adi Sesha told me to not do anything for Mother. Realize that 
her days of prosperity are soon to arrive.  
Sage Vashista says: 
Amma will see the Lord in th e red robe, Prema Sai. From that day onwards, she 
will reside in Prema Shanthi Nilayam. She will rule the hearts of all from there. This will 
definitely happen and I will bear witness to it. 
Sage Viswamitra says: 
All obstacles that came in the past and tho se that may occur in the future have 
been removed. She will attain a new peak of glory. Who in this world has the great 
fortune as this graceful woman? 
Shiva Shiva  
 
  
☪    @  
    9    
 
39 
 
 
KAGABHUJANDAR NADI  
Date: 5 February 2008 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai - Prasanna Kaandam 
Sri Vasantha Sai Amma is God and has taken Avatar as this human form. It is not 
for her personal welfare, but for the welfare of the world that she has incarnated. It is to 
ensure that spirituality is not ruined and to ensure that the Sanatana Dharma flourishes.  
She has self-willed knowledge of wisdom and education. Just as the magnet draws 
the iron to it, she captivates the whole world and pulls all towards her. With the one -
pointed goal of attaining God, she ha s realized the easiest means for that. For this very 
purpose, she renounced her family life and assumed the life of renunciation. Setting up 
a Gurukula ashram, she is imparting divine wisdom to the seekers. 
Bahuladevi, the wife of Sri Kagabhujandar is her mother. Just as the Sage 
Kagabhujandar preached divine wisdom and served the world, in the same way she too 
will serve the people by preaching the means to attain God. 
This divine woman, in the later years, like the ancient sages, will appear in more 
than one body at various places and bless her devotees. For the welfare of the devotees, 
she will perform many siddhis. Her tasks will be such as to be appreciated and liked by 
people. She will receive the appreciation of one and all. 
She is the one who will li ve in her subtle body with Bhagavan Sri Sathya Sai Baba 
having gained His blessings and grace. Baba will proclaim in the later years that she is 
the sole heir to His spiritual legacy. She will come to be known with the rechristened 
name of Vasantha Sai Ram. 
On her completion of her 70 th year and stepping into the 71 st year, in the Tamil 
month of Thai, Swami will invite her whole -heartedly and in her absolute state to 
Puttaparthi. In the gathering of devotees of various nations for japa and dhyana, Swami 
will declare that she is blemishless. To her heart’s content, Swami will bathe her in His 
love. He will declare one day that she has taken birth to remove the faults of Kali Yuga. 
Her long cherished desire for the touch of His divine feet, for which she had s hed tears 
of blood, will be fulfilled on that day by Swami. She will touch His feet, bathe them with 
her tears of blood and perform Pada Pooja. She will forget herself. 
☪    @  
    9    
 
40 
 
Moreover, He will change her human form, administer to her divine nectar, 
present her b efore everyone, accept her and acknowledge her. He will bestow on her 
every wealth. On that day, she will have no more wants. 
In her 72 nd year, she will get an  interview with Baba. At that time, both will 
converse with utmost love. This is truth. He will b less her, transform her body, merge in 
Him like two souls merging into one body, like Mahalakshmi who is forever serving the 
lotus feet of the Lord. He will keep her beside Him and let her manage His affairs. He 
will proclaim to the world that she is the o nly heir to His legacy because of her divine 
bonds with Him. 
In her 73 rd - 74th year, Baba along with His close aides, VIPs and people from 
various nations will pay a visit to Mukthi Nilayam in Madurai. He will take food in the 
ashram. Both will be seated together. All His devotees will become her devotees. He will 
present clothes to  Amma’s disciples in Mukthi Nilayam; He will settle their Karma 
accounts and bestow Mukthi on them. At that time, He will release the books of wisdom 
written by her both at Mukt hi Nilayam and at Prasanthi Nilayam. He Himself will 
distribute them to devotees. He will arrange for these books to be sent to many places all 
over the world. 
She will occupy a respected position in the world. She laid the path of Prema as the 
only state and only principle for attaining God. Substantiating that, Swami will 
authenticate in writing and declare to the world that she had done one pointed sadhana 
as her very breath to attain God and therefore, she is the only heir to His legacy. At that 
time, she will acquire Baba’s full power. She will bestow spring to the world. 
 Before her 75th year, they will unite and live together. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
41 
 
 
AGASTHYA NADI 
Date: 5 February 2008 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu  
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai - Jnana Sukshma Kaandam 
Tuesday - On this day is being read the Jnana Kaandam of Vasanthamma who has 
been blessed by His divine Excellency Bhagavan Baba. 
Sage Agasthya after prostrating at the feet of Ganesha, the benefactor of the world, 
is proceeding to convey the Jnana Kaandam of this lady. 
Before proceeding to explain, he is telling without any mistake that this palm leaf 
pertains to this very lady. 
The thumbprint taken from her left hand has the lines in the shape of conch and is 
called the “line of wisdom.” It is the line of wisdom with aspects of the divine Conch, like 
the one on the palm of the deity, Tirupati Balaji. It is the ‘Jnana rekha’, which has the 
potential to bestow wisdom. Her lines have both these aspects. Because of those lines, it 
has three points, which  can confer prosperity. She was born with the blessings of the 
trinity of Gods: the Creator, the Sustainer and the Destroyer. 
She was born on the dark day of New Moon on the Tamil year of Vegudhanya, 
Ipasi month, 7 th Day. She was born because of the  prayers of her parents. She was the 
only child. There was a doubt whether her parents would ever beget a child and 
eventually she was born due to the divine blessings. She was born with blessings of the 
whole of the celestial world, sages and saints. She married early in life and bore three 
children. All the children married and she has seen the grandchildren. She was inclined 
spiritually, even while her husband was alive. She lived with her husband in family life 
up to the age of 63. 
63-65th years, after completing all obligations towards children, she renounced 
family life and taking the path of spirituality, set up an ashram to live in solitude. Many 
affluent people helped her. Ashrams will be setup in her name. She will have many 
disciples. Her father’s name is Madhura Kavi, mother’s name Vedavalli and the name of 
her husband Manoharan. Vasanthamma, whose nadi is being read now, is the other 
name of Vasantham, Spring. 
The date on which this nadi is being seen is the day prior to New Moon day 
(Amavasya). She is the fortunate one to acquire wisdom. Possessing the divine qualities 
of God, she has two births. 
☪    @  
    9    
 
42 
 
In the previous birth, she was born in the Northern state as woman, got married 
with no satisfaction in married life. She had divine power. After acquir ing divine power, 
she had been worshipped as ‘Amman’. Her name and form is popular and is worshipped 
not only in the northern part, but also all over the world. She is Radha. 
In her earlier birth, she knew all languages. She knows all the languages those 
spoken, unspoken and language with no written script. She will know all sign languages. 
No one knows that she was Radha in her earlier birth. She alone knows who she is and 
how she lived. She is that fortunate one who knows the languages of everyone and als o 
can perceive their feelings. 
In this Tamil month of Thai, on the night of New Moon (end of 6 th and early 7 th) 
day at around 1201 hours when she will be meditating upon Bhagavan Sathya Sai Baba 
(who is the basis of Truth), some celestial beings will escor t her to the abode of Baba. 
She will earn 100% grace of Baba. Baba’s power will be conferred on her.  
Her mental anguish will subside. It will remove all her sufferings of yearning, 
problems, confusion, tears and all. At that time, she will receive good ne ws with the 
blessings of the whole of the celestial world. The following Thursday, with the blessings 
of the divine messengers, her power will be known to God Himself. The event will 
indicate the cause of why she took birth in this life and the nature of h er mission. From 
that day onwards, her behavior, wisdom and mode of speech will undergo 
transformation. She rises higher and higher, her sanctity and purity ever increasing. 
In the night of Amavasya of Tamil month ‘Maasi’, this Mother will again get the 
grace of Baba, who has come to establish Truth in this world.  
After completion of 70th year and in the 71st year, on the night of Amavasya of Tamil 
month of ‘Ipasi’, the Sathya Yuga will dawn. Amma’s name will change. With her name 
of Vasantha, the harbinger of Spring, the name of Baba who has come to establish truth, 
honesty and justice combine together and prefixing the auspicious letter of ‘Sri”, her 
name will be Sri Sri Sri Vasantha Sathya Sai. 
The purpose of Kalki Avatar is to destroy the evil and creat e the good powers. She 
herself is the Kalki Avatar. She has the absolute power. She is the other incarnation of 
Baba. From her 71 st year, her grace will shower on the devas, common folks and people 
from all walks of life. This will start with this time and  will continue until the end. 
During this period, others will come to know the secret of her birth. Through the media, 
the whole world will know that she is Baba’s other incarnation. She will earn the 
acceptance of people. If it is said now that she has co me as Baba, no one would believe 
it. From the night of tomorrow, 25% of this will be made known. 
At her 71st year this will be suddenly known. Baba himself will reveal that Vasantha 
is His form. 
During 73-75 years, with the blessings of Sri Sathya Sai Baba , ashrams will come 
up in her own name. She will gradually be known all over the world. 
☪    @  
    9    
 
43 
 
The whole world will realize that she is the only God who has come to sanctify the 
world. If the evil look at her even with ill intentions, their evil nature will vanis h and in 
its place good nature spring up in them. Be it anywhere in the world, by merely 
remembering her, her grace will shower forth. She will bestow grace on all without any 
consideration of caste, creed or financial status. She is the divine incarnation  who has 
come to alleviate grief and sorrow. By merely mentioning her name once, incurable 
diseases, sorrows, which have not found respite despite visits to number of temples, will 
take leave of themselves immediately. 
It is Baba’s command that she has to live amidst the common people, realize their 
problems and after giving them succor, then she will become divine. In her past birth, 
she had acquired half the power of Krishna and showered grace. She lives the life of 
ordinary human with the purpose of prea ching what human life is and how even after 
getting married, one can attain God. 
She alone possesses the power to alter the accounts prepared by Lord 
Yamadharma, (Lord of Death). Even if she were to leave the earth, her name, form and 
power will reign till the disintegration of this world. 
Even though she had lived with her husband Manoharan, she might have lived 
with the feeling of having lived with God;  for it was Baba who was in the form of 
Manoharan. 
As Baba lived with her in the form of Manoharan, her thoughts did not waver. She 
knows that she lived with God. Baba was with her in the form of Manoharan in her 
young age. This is known to this divine woman. Her husband Manoharan also knew. 
However, others do not know. The fact of her having lived with God will be known on 
her 71st birthday. 
She was Radha in her previous birth. In this birth, she will be the ‘Divine Wife’ of 
Baba. 
Those who do not go to temples normally, will come and worship her believing she 
has come to the world for the good of humanity. 
Sage Agasthya concludes this palm text by saying that he regrets for having 
ventured to write the Jnana Kaandam of this Divine Incarnation. 
 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
44 
 
 
AGASTHYA SHUKA NADI  
 
Date: 5-6 March 2008  
Place: Palani 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai - Jnana Kaandam 
After praying to Shiva and Brahma, he starts writing the Jnana Kaandam palm-leaf 
of Smt. Vasantha. 
The thumbprint on the left hand of this woman is called ‘line of wisdom’. There are 
nine points (dots) thereon. These represent the nine planets. The nine planet s will be 
helpful to her. 
It is due to their position she is able to give wisdom to the world. Here God, 
Himself is her Guru and she becomes the Guru to the world. 
This person is born in a respectable family. Has ‘Dhanush Lagnam’. Dhanush 
means the bow. Sh e was born in this zodiac sign of ‘Sagittarius’ to show that she 
functions with a mind that does not waver and is one pointed in her thought. 
She was born under the sign of  ‘Tula Rasi’ (Libra) to show that she leads life 
balancing justice, honesty, righteousness and adhering to rules of society. 
She was born to her parents as a blessing to them. 
She had Madhura Kavi as father to identify her with the town of Madurai.  
She had Vedavalli as her mother to show that even without learning the Vedas , she 
has come to teach the four Vedas: Rig, Yajur, Sama and Atharvana. 
She had Manoharan as her husband to acquire strength of mind. 
She has the name Vasantha so that she may give the abundance of Spring to all. 
She married; bore two sons and one daughter. They all mar ried and she was 
blessed with grand children. In her 58 -59th year she changed to spiritual life, took to 
renunciation; she fully entered spiritual life on the years 63 -64. As of today, she is born 
a human being who has attained the state of God. She is a Goddess. 
With the blessings of Baba, she has constructed a temple, performed 
Kumbhabhishekam, consecrated it and set up an ashram. She is administering 
individually an ashram of her own; she has a separate spiritual kingdom and is ruling it. 
She has no human guru. Like Baba, she is born as Avatar. 
No human being is her Guru. Like Baba, her birth is also self -willed. Baba Himself 
has taken birth as her. Even today, those who are of divine or spiritual mind will see 
Baba’s light in her form. Those who thirst f or God, possessing a divine mind can see the 
aura of Baba in her form. 
☪    @  
    9    
 
45 
 
When her husband was alive, the wisdom remained within her heart only. After 
the demise of her husband, it started to be revealed. Instead of her name Vasantha, the 
name of Baba would b e more appropriate for her. Even today, she will possess all the 
qualities of self -confidence; courage like that of a man. She is a woman of strong 
conviction who can achieve her goal by her own sadhana. She is  young in disposition 
belying her age. She is very energetic. Even though she may have many disciples, she is 
capable of attending to her routines herself. She has the appearance and heart of a child. 
With no guru, by her sustained efforts and sadhana, she has attained her goal to 
the extent of 40%. S tarting from today, after 3 months, she will change from human life 
to divine life. There will be a marked in difference in health. She will have more of divine 
blessings. On the coming Chitra -Pournami she will acquire 50% of Baba’s power; to be 
followed b y 100% power on the Vaikasi -Pournami. Baba will function fully from her 
physical form. From 70th year to beginning of 71st year, her form will undergo change and 
Baba’s form will be visible on her face. Her eyes will change ‘to the eyes’ of Baba. 
From her 72nd year, it will be known that she is the purest incarnated form of Baba. 
She will be known as Vasantha Sai Ram combining her name and that of Baba. 
In her 73 rd year, her body will become divine body. She will give visions by 
changing herself as Vinayaka, Shiva, Parvati, etc. 
In her 75 th year, she will get the help of enlightened ones and more wealth. The 
ashram will prosper. 
She will treat her sons, daughter and relatives as ordinary people and will not give 
them special status. 
During her 75 th to 80 th year, she will undertake trips abroad. She will give 
discourses there. Many saints will come seeking her. She despises self -promotion and 
wants that individuals recognize her on their own. With her advance in age, she will 
grow younger. 
In her 80-81st year, the ashram at her father’s place would develop further. She will 
set up feeding of the poor. Many trusts will be established in her name to foster free 
medical services, free education, assistance in marriages, etc. Financial help will come 
forth from many countries. 
Wherever she is worshipped, many events and miracles will take place. She has 
learned by experience how human life must be lived and how it must not be. She will 
preach those experiences. She is the omniscient God. 
Even though she is God, she will live the life of an ordinary human until her end. 
Professing herself to be simple, she will live with the ordinary people. All the Gods 
would visit her place and offer their blessings. All her disciples would stand by her at all 
times. She will announ ce her death in advance. At that time, she will give her disciples 
the jnana deeksha and confer Mukthi on them. 
At the last moments, she will disappear like the sages. Even after her disappearance, 
she will remain in the hearts and homes of all. 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
46 
 
 
MAHASHIVA THULYA NADI  
 
Date: 5-6 March 2008 
Place: Palani 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai - General Kaandam 
Goddess Parvati asks Lord Shiva to tell the reading for this woman as she has  
acquired many merits in her divine thoughts and requests that she acquire many m ore 
paths in her pursuit of wisdom. 
The mark on her left thumb has two circles with a dot inside. As a result, she is 
born in a respectable family, as a divine child and as a boon to her parents. She was born 
with supreme devotion to God. Her zodiac chart indicates she will be worshipped by 
many. This will bring her glory. She possesses the quality of her words coming true 
(Vaak siddhi Phalitam).  
She was fortunate to get this Husband. His grace is with her. Right now, she is 
engaged in spiritual service ac tivities. This will continue. She will worship the Vishnu 
form of God. She is the one to spread the fame of her Guru. She has the complete 
blessings of her Guru. She is the one who performs her tasks, services with complete 
commitment. She has secured the Grace of Baba. She is engaged in teaching and 
preaching in the path of divine wisdom. Due to her meditation, she knows many vidyas. 
As a result of the consummation of her sadhana, she is adept in many skills. She will 
perform all services with dedication. She will get many successes to her credit.  
She will give spiritual advice only to those who are spiritually inclined and 
wholeheartedly desire it. She gives Jnana upadesh on the consideration that it is sought 
in all earnestness. Many disciples will keep coming to her to acquire spiritual advice. 
She is guru to many disciples. She has many disciples. Many devotees come to have 
darshan. This will grow more in the times to come. She will preach the means for 
attaining peace of mind. She will give visions as God. She has phenomenal power of 
penance.  
Even those who are in prison and those who have committed such crimes to 
warrant imprisonment will transform because of her preaching. She will emphasize the 
need for service activities to others. She is in a stat e where her influence will suffer no 
damage. Her influence will never decrease and will be there until the last stage of her 
life. This will continue until her end. She has already been abroad. She will continue to 
visit more countries. She will grace many  foreign devotees. She will have a following in 
☪    @  
    9    
 
47 
 
many more countries. Foreigners will lovingly serve her. These are results of her past 
merits. She had relation with Baba in her previous birth. That is why her bhakthi has 
increased in this birth. 
 After the middle of 70th year and beginning of 71st year, she will get more of Baba’s 
grace. She will create a meditation hall for many people to congregate and do 
meditation. It will be beautiful and spiritually charged. All the present impediments will 
be removed  from the 71 st year. Disciples from abroad will render financial help. Her 
obstacles will be removed by governmental assistance and through friends occupying 
position of influence in the society. She will get unexpected support from the southeast 
direction. In her 71 st year on full-moon day, on a Thursday at the evening time, she will 
get this. Moreover, during her meditation, news regarding these will be audible to her 
through divine announcements. In meditation time, she will come to know of events 
that will happen in the future. This would be to confirm events that are imminent.  
 During her 72 nd year, she will be at the peak of wisdom. She will explain the 
concept of Kundalini. She will preach the means to attain it. She is capable of knowing 
the past, present and future. She will administer the ashram. Her administration will be 
carried out with such a precision that her contemporaries running ashrams would be 
wonderstruck. Many will help her in this mission. She will also render service in the 
field of education and medicine. At first, she will start with the handicapped. These 
activities will increase in her 73 rd year onwards and will function successfully. Her 
biography, mantras and words of wisdom will reach the people in many ways. 
Consequently, many will worship her. For many she would act as the Mother. 
 In the 74th-75th year, her ashram will grow to be equal to Baba’s ashram whom she 
herself worships. She is capable of performing many miracles. Many devotees will visit 
her ashram with the convictio n that they will secure as much merit here which 
otherwise they would get by visiting the Prasanthi Nilayam. She possesses the merit of 
her words coming true. 
 Lord Shiva says, “You know about yourself. You have the power to save those who 
come under your refuge.” 
 Situations are conducive that in the years 75 -76 she will perform many miracles. 
She will taste success continuously. This person has knowledge of many truths. Even 
after attaining Mukthi, she will continue to live in the hearts of people. Her fame will not 
rest till the end of this world.  
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
48 
 
 
MAHA SHIVA VAAKYA NADI 
 
Date: 29 April 2008 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai - Jnana Kaandam 
She is guileless as a child. She is full of wisdom, character, potential and  great 
devotion. She is great devotee who has attained the grace of God. She has perfect and 
whole-hearted devotion. She has acquired the teachings of many saints and sages. While 
performing meditation at the jeeva samadhi of saints, she has secured their sparshan 
(touch feeling). They have blessed her. She has the capacity to know their true forms. 
She will feel on the top of her head, divine pronouncement from the Eeshanya 
corner on the full moon day at the Thiruvannamalai Temple. She will envision a ligh t 
and a few songs. She will know this in advance. From then on, all wisdoms about Truth 
will be revealed. She would have earned the blessings of two sages/saints. She has 
earned the full grace of Sage Vashista.  
Twice she will experience sorrow equivalent to the death experience : first, in her 
70th year and later during her 72nd year. Due to her contact with saints and sages, she will 
go beyond this attaining the highest state. When she meditates on the hilly ranges of 
Pothigai Mountain bearing the waterfal ls and many herbal plantations, she will realize 
many truths. On this earth, she will receive the blessings of siddhas like Maharishi 
Ramana and others. She has had the vision of Vinayaka. She will virtuously tread path of 
Truth and excel in it. She will ha ve the abundant grace of Kaali of Chidambaram Thillai. 
She will fast for a period of one year. Her teachings and mantras will become known to 
the outside world. Her very body will become luminous. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
49 
 
 
VASHISTA NADI  
 
Date: 29 April 2008 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai - General Readings 
 At the Brahmamurtha, Vashista goes to Sathya Loka, after doing penance, bowing 
to Brahma and getting his blessings, conveys the general readings about this divine lady. 
Normally before r eading the nadi text, prayers are made to God and then the palm leaf 
text read. However, here in the case of this Amma, he specially seeks the blessings of 
Brahma to tell the readings.  
She is a very blessed soul, born in good family, a very respectable fa mily. She has 
normal complexion, normal height. During childhood, she would have been affected by 
disease now and then; mother too would have had some diseases. Before her 13 th year, 
mother would be affected by a blood related disease. After being bed ridd en for some 
time, she would have died. Vasantha was brought up in the care of her father. Marriage 
took place at the 16 th year and she spent married life with a husband. Even though in 
family life, she was devoted to God. Her husband will help her in her pursuit.  
 At the 30 th year, she will get clarity while in family life and will commence the 
path towards upliftment along with husband. She will protect her father and relations 
with her devotion to God. In her 54 th year, her father will meet death due to a vehicle 
accident. At her 61 st year, after the death of her husband, she will surrender her mind to 
God. In the 64 th year, she will set up an ashram and render the service of spiritual 
wisdom to people. The body may be afflicted by disease of skin and wat er. Even though 
she would preach and show spiritual path, she would be expecting that Swami should 
lead her. The re will be fear and anxiety within the mind and consequently it may at 
times be agitated. She will visit many holy places. She will totally surrender to God. 
 She has the blessings of Sage Vashista and his wife Arundhathi. She will also have 
the blessings of Baba. She will secure the darshan of the trinity of Gods and also their 
powers. 
 During the completion of 70 th year and beginning of 71 st year, she will get the 
complete divine grace. Her words will come true. She will assume a new name. This will 
take place with full blessings and grace. She will cure diseases through Siddha system of 
medicine. 
 Before the 75 th year, she will reach the state o f yogi. The enlightened and 
emancipated will praise her. She will visit many foreign countries and give discourses, 
☪    @  
    9    
 
50 
 
advice and spiritual guidance. Presently, she may face enemies but through her 
devotion, she will vanquish them. Along with spiritual servic e, she will also render holy 
service. In the 76 th year, she will again build ashrams. They will turn out to be beneficial 
to the people. She will set up meditation halls, yoga halls, hospitals, etc. During those 
times, she will get the grace of Sathya Sai Baba. People will bow to her accepting her as 
Mother. 
 In her 76 th year, she will render advice to bigger ashrams and also administer 
them. There are chances of her functioning as the very form of Shakthi during those 
times. She will come to know certain t ruths. If some of them are revealed, she may 
encounter evils. Problems may be faced when the truths are put to practice. At that time, 
if a yajna is performed and then the truths revealed, many elders will bow to her. She 
will cure incurable diseases.  
 In the 80 th year, she will become complete in all respects and reach the state of 
Yogi. She will perform yogic exercise by controlling the five senses and making her very 
breath as her food. As a result of this , the whole world will attain prosperity. She wi ll set 
up ashrams at many places in the world.  
Many devotees will worship you as Mother and God. At this age, she will perform 
yagna for the world peace. Because of this, there will be transformation not only in the 
ways of the world, but also in the wond ers of the world. Evil will be destroyed  and 
injustice removed. There will be happiness in the world and the remaining tasks will be 
executed with the assistance of the elder son. Many service organizations will come up 
and be of use to society.  
 
 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
51 
 
 
 
VASHISTA NADI 
Date: 6 May 2008 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
Sage Vashista says glory to the divine feet of Mother Shakthi and is giving the nadi 
of Sri Vasantha Sai. Now you are facing some obstacles, the thoughts th at arise in you at 
this time are not getting fulfilled. However, Sri Sai Baba’s grace is protecting you at this 
difficult time. So I am giving you a specific mantra, the Shiva Mantra, which when you 
chant, will pave the path to complete your penance. It wi ll remove Adharma and 
establish Dharma. I will give you such a mantra, which you will chant and gain the 
fruition of this birth. This birth will bear fruit. The mantra is as follows: 
Omkar Pranava Shakthi Jnana Jyothi 
Chinmayamai Enadhullay Siddhikka 
Shiva Vasiya Shakthi Sri Sai Baba 
Saravnaantha Jyothi Vasiya 
Sollum, Seyalum, Mandiramum, Enakkul Vasiya 
Vittadhum, Thottadhum, Poorthi Seyya 
Jeeva oliyaai, Sudar oliyaai, Atma Jothiyaai 
Param oliyaai Siddhikka Swahaa 
 
The meaning: 
Omkar, the first Pranava Shakthi,  
The light of wisdom, 
Let this come into me and merge with me. 
For this, I want Sai Shiva’s grace.  
Let the light of Saravana, Subramanian,  
Come and fill me within. 
For this my words, action and mantra 
Must come within me.  
☪    @  
    9    
 
52 
 
Let the unfulfilled touch find fulfillment. 
Let the supreme light of the soul fill me.  
This mantra should be chanted early morning for twenty days, 21 times a day. At 
the completion of the mantra, you will have the darshan of the Lord though your 
devotion, Bhakthi Yoga. Swami will  shower His blessings; you will enjoy complete grace 
and compassion from Him. Thus, your birth will attain fulfillment. 
Notes:  
* I was able to have the physical darshan of Swami in May at Brindavan, 
Whitefield, as this reading foretold. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sage Vashista 
☪    @  
    9    
 
53 
 
Readings taken after Sri Sathya Sai Baba left the body on 24 April 2011.  
BOGAR NADI  
Date: 25 May 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai – Jeeva Nadi  
Bhagavan Sri Sathya Sai Baba will give public darshan in two years i n His Divine 
body in Prasanthi Nilayam. Nine days after this darshan, on Poornima day, He will call 
Vasantha Sai Amma to Prasanthi Nilayam. The wisdom books written by Sri Vasantha 
Sai will be placed in Prasanthi Book Stall.  
Twenty-one days after the firs t anniversary of the Kumbhabhishekam for the new 
building, Vishwa Brahma Garbha Kottam, Amma may go and stay inside. This will be a 
Sunday. Swami will tell Amma this. If she had gone there before this time, it would have 
been dangerous for her body. Though  Swami has left His physical body, He is still living 
in the same body. Amma knows this. Amma’s body will become a jyothi and merge with 
Swami’s body. Amma is one wonderful human being. She will surely be victorious. 
Those who are in Mukthi Nilayam with Am ma will attain the grace of God. They are not 
living for family or money, but only for God. They have no Maya . They are not human 
beings, but are living in human forms in the Jeevan Muktha state. All have come from 
Deva Loka. When Amma disappears, they wil l also leave. In his previous birth, SV was 
their son. It is for this reason he is performing service . It is due to the command from 
the previous birth.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bogar 
☪    @  
    9    
 
54 
 
 
DEVA RISHI NADI 
(this Rishi predates Sage Agasthya) 
 
Date: 31 May 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu  
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
Vedyar Rishi begins by worshipping Lord Vinayaka and Lord Muruga. He will now 
begin to tell her nadi. The thumb impression is known as Kalasa . It denotes the Poorna 
Kumbha. This thumbprint indicates that she is the one who gives life to God; the one 
who is in the Sanctum Sanctorum. As she has this print, she gives life force to all living 
beings in Bhooloka. She is the Mother. In the world of living beings, she has come as 
Mother with the Motherly nature. 
  What has happened in marriage until this point is not marriage; she will only 
have marriage in the future. At the time of seeing the nadis now, she is undergoing more 
suffering in her heart and mind. This suffering is due to the blue Lord, Swami, who 
kindles these feelings of separation.  
She is always asking Lord Perumal, ‘Where is Vishnu? I do not know the place 
where He is?’ She is now undergoing this same suffering. Just like a place filled with 
darkness, which is suddenly filled with a broad light, it is on ly when she sees His form 
again that her face will blossom.  
She asks, ‘When will that good fortune come?’ It comes by itself. At that time, there 
will be no faults or shortcomings. It will be a happy state. This nadi is read when she is 
the age of 73. This event will happen two months from today. At that time, her body will 
be filled with tejas. She will see the face of her beloved within two months. Now her 
body has more heat within it and she is suffering more problems. Yet, as she is always 
thinking of the Divine, of God, she has no time to think of her body or pay attention to it. 
Thus, her medical expenses are more. She will use allopathic medicines at this time.  
At the age of 74, she will be cured fully. Her Madhura Yoga, sweet union,  will 
increase m ore and more, but it will not reach fulfillment or become complete at this 
time. Due to this unfulfilment, she will have another birth. It will only become complete 
in the next birth. In this birth, there is no physical nearness. It is for this she undergo es 
great mental suffering. This suffering will be with her in her last moments also. Who can 
console her? Nothing changes regardless of what anyone does!  
☪    @  
    9    
 
55 
 
She has come in many Ages and is seen in different ways in each yuga. When this 
jeeva attains complet eness of Prema, it will become the Maha Yuga. At this time, 33 
crores of devas will be in the state of Shanthi. There will also be some changes to the 
body of Shiva and Shakthi. Thus, in the next birth this Mother is born as the child of 
Shiva and Shakthi. As she is born as their child, Swami, Mayava, descends on Bhooloka 
and will accept her. It is for this reason Shiva and Shakthi come to earth as her parents. 
This is also the leela of Mayava, Swami. Up until this time, Mahavishnu only takes 
Avatar for Shiva. Now this state changes and Shiva Shakthi take Avatar for Mahavishnu. 
They will be born, grow, marry, have a girl child. Swami will marry this girl. This makes 
the earth change to Yuva Balaka Yuga, a youthful age, a virgin creation, the ‘Young Age 
Yuga’. It is through this that Mother’s anger and frustrations cool down. Mother tells, 
I do not want to be born again. In this birth, Swami did not live with me, so I am 
suffering more. I have no desire for another birth.  
In answer to this, Swami tells directly: 
You are the only person in My body. You are My conscience. You are the thinking 
in My heart. The thoughts that you have in your heart and the thoughts in Mine are the 
same. Why do you think like this? I am always with you, but you do not listen to what  I 
tell. You want nearness to My physical form and see all through this one view point. I 
have clarified this point to you many times also. Yet, your frustration has not cooled 
down. Thus to cool you down, I will come to you directly at the age of 76 and p ut pottu 
and kumkum on your forehead. Your anger will then cool down. You will see all in the 
next birth. I will accept you. Then in the next birth, I will fulfill all your wishes. All your 
desires will be fulfilled. 
 
 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
56 
 
 
ATRI MAHARISHI NADI 
Date: 31 May 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
This is the first Kaandam. Before reading and explaining the 
first Kaandam, Maharishi offers worship to the Ardhanareswara 
form of God. Now, he will begin to tell the nadi. 
I have told all about her before in the nadi. Now, what do you 
want to know? What is the reason for wanting to see this nadi? You are asking for 
mental peace and for her attaining God’s feet and about Mukthi Nilayam.  
Now at the time of seeing the nadi is Jnana Y ogam. Due to separation and 
attachment, Mother is suffering more and is like an ordinary human being. This is not 
her true state. Why are you suffering Mother? Have you forgotten for what purpose you 
came here? You came here to tell the glories and spread the fame of God in the world. 
Why then do you suffer from this bond of attachment to Swami? It is because you have 
come to this earth and taken physical form only. As you have this physical form, these 
thoughts come to you. You have attained Mukthi, focus all your thoughts in this state; 
then, Swami will give His darshan at any time. Once you remove this Maya, you will 
know. Though the nine planets are playing with all, they cannot do anything to you.  
 Swami tells:  
 “You are filled with worry as you do no t know your own state . When you leave 
this state, you will have a vision of Me. When you see Me at that time, Mukthi Nilayam 
will come to its correct state, without blemish. There will be great progress for those on 
the spiritual path in Mukthi Nilayam. Yo u have done a great deal of research, which has 
taken the form of many books. All books come to Me through your hand, with your 
hand.”  
You will be in a good state at the age of 76. At the age of 77, all in the world will live 
a comfortable and prosperous life because of you. At the age of 78, you will foretell of 
many great destructions that will take place. Many will die due to great fires. What you 
have foretold will come to pass. You however will remain in the state of witness. You will 
not be able to g ive relief to worries of those who know you. You will have no reason to 
☪    @  
    9    
 
57 
 
stop their worries. At the age of 79, you will perform a great yagna for the sake of world 
peace. From this time, all in the world will have prosperity.  
At the age of 80, you will see  Swami and tell Him of all worries of this birth. At 81, 
your feelings will intensify and the body will be unable to bear it. Then at the age of 82, 
you will merge with Swami, Mayava, in front of all. He will place tilak (kumkum) on 
your forehead and then make you merge with Him as a jyothi. He will then also 
disappear from this world. 
How much you have cried for this Mayava in this birth. Seeing this, Swami will 
come in the next birth. There, you will see, stay and marry Him. You will preach 
spirituality to all. There will be no blemishes or shortcomings in this life. It will be a very 
happy and divine life. It is for this reason alone that in this birth, you have many desires 
and sweet imaginings. After the New Age dawns, Mother Parashakthi will pour her grace 
on you. Mayava, Swami, will come to Bhooloka in a beautiful fair form.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bhagavan Sri Sathya Sai Baba 
☪    @  
    9    
 
58 
 
 
 
PAAMBATTIE SIDDHA NADI  
(Snake Charmer) 
 
Date: 31 May 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu  
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
Before beginning the nadi, I  will offer worship to each god. For Mother, I offer 
worship to Shiva and Shakthi. Parvathi Devi now tells: 
She is the Shakthi, born on the earth at the correct time and under the correct 
planets. All was at the good time. She is born with the Deva Amsa Re kha on her thumb 
print, which indicates God’s aspect. She came to this earth and is born with no 
imperfections in the body. In the future, she will be without any confusion and will 
attain the Supreme state. She has this good fortune. She has the Snake Yog a, (Kundalini 
Yoga). This Sarpa, Snake Yoga, functions in a very unique, special and extraordinary 
way in her life. Her husband, Mahavishnu, whom she likes, lies on the serpent, Adi 
Sesha. She was married, but her heart only wanted Srinivasa (Krishna). As she faced 
obstacles in her householder life, in the future there will be none. Her future married life 
is also unique and special. She has this great good fortune.  
She has a snake bridge, (the Kundalini Stupi) the bridge from earth to heaven. It is 
through this snake, her life is moving like a snake, revolving like a snake, moving 
through the 7 chakras of kundalini. Like Rahu, whose body undulates, she is always 
suffering, going up and down. At the time of seeing the nadi, she is 73. She is now very 
worried. All worries will be removed and she will have a good life. It is in this age, she 
will have the great fortune to see the form of the one whom she loves. After the age of 75, 
she will have darshan of His physical form. She had no family life in this birt h. She will 
have married life and after marriage will be very happy.  
Age 76 - she will have nearness to God. There will be no fault in her body and she 
will lead a full and happy life. All her sufferings till this point are due to disturbances 
and changing in her mind. It is for this reason obstacles have come.  
Age 77 – She will be united with her ‘husband’, through one disciple. At that time 
she will be very happy. Her relatives and those born with her will always help her. 
Mukthi Nilayam will have no faults or shortcomings and will always be in a good state. 
☪    @  
    9    
 
59 
 
Age 77 to 78 - Many people will come in search of her. After the age of age 78 and 
through the grace of Parvathi Devi’s, the circumstances will be set for the next birth. All 
will be set accordingly.  
Age 79 - She will perform many yagnas and yagas for God. She will raise Mukthi 
Nilayam to a high state. This is not an ordinary state, but one  equal to Prasanthi 
Nilayam.  
Age 80 – She will leave from Mukthi Nilayam and go to Swami where she will 
merge i n Him. She came to the ashram, leaving all family and will go to Prasanthi 
Nilayam with her disciples only. They are doing all work for Amma, helping her in her 
mission. In Prasanthi, her body will become a jyothi and she will leave earth between 12 
pm and 6 pm in front of all. After Mother leaves the world, Mayava will then also leave 
His body. The two will return to Their original state. They will again descend on 
Bhooloka. At the age of 13, she will meet again with Mayava and at 17 she will marry 
Him. At 21, their child will be born and at 26, they will protect the world as Universal 
Father and Mother. 
In this birth, her life has two poles. The husband is in the North side, she in the 
South. In her next birth, the same male and female forms will descend o n earth. At that 
time all will be equal; there will be no blemishes. It will only be Sathya’s victory; the 
state of Victorious Truth.  
The Atma is imperishable, but the bodies are separate. In the next Age, the Atma 
will be without worries. In order to com e in the next birth, two forms are required. They 
are now creating these two forms. They are now describing how the forms of Prema and 
Prema Sai will be. They shape and describe each part of their forms. All details of the 
village, the region, the father a nd mother are all decided now. In the next birth, the 
husband and wife will be like two entwined snakes, the Brahmarandra state, the 
experience state. There will be some small difference in the body. This is to show them 
as ideal and exemplary and shows he r divinity. All who see this will be filled with 
happiness. It is not a defect in the physical body; it will not be unsightly. Thus ends the 
reading.  
 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
60 
 
 
THIRUMOOLAR NADI  
Date: 31 May 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu  
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
I will first offer worship to Lord Muruga and his consorts, Sri Valli Devi and 
Daivayanai. Thirumoolar will now begin the reading.  
The thumbprint has Kalasa and crown . This indicates the divine aspect and God. 
The crown is the aspect of the king. S he is born into a very good and rich family on 
Bhooloka. Though this is so, she was naturally inclined to spiritual life, a life for God. 
This state began at the age of 30. It was then she totally stopped her life as a 
householder, she rejected all, realiz ing children and family as perishable. It was at this 
age of 30 that she became totally absorbed in spiritual life. At the age of 33 to 34, she 
completely controlled her physical body.  
Now at the time of seeing this nadi she is aged 73. Though she has ful ly attained 
the God State, she is unable to enjoy this prosperity. She is asking question after 
question. She has herself become a question! Always questions, questions, questions. 
Her life has become a question. Yet, she receives answers for all the quest ions she asks. 
Though she will have all prosperity and a healthy body, her mind is tired. Though the 
body is strong, the mind is always tired. As there is no balance between the mind and 
the body, she is discouraged and has no interest or enthusiasm. Knowi ng this, Mayava 
will make some magic tricks. When the moon is ruling in the month of Adi, this dancing 
Adi wind and Mayava will come. It is from the month of Adi that Amma will have new 
enthusiasm. From this time, she will be like a young girl. She will ar ise as a young girl 
and all in Mukthi Nilayam will celebrate. This feeling will be with her to her last 
moments. Her happiness will go on increasing more and more, as she chants Mayava’s 
mantra.  
Age 75 – 76 It is at this time, Mayava will give a vision li ke the full moon and show 
His full body. When she has His full darshan, He will initiate her with mantra upadesh. 
After this, her tongue will always be chanting this auspicious Thiru mantra. This mantra 
that she has chanted will be inscribed on copper plat es, yantra and placed in homes of 
all and worshipped. At that time, all will enjoy prosperity by chanting this mantra. What 
is the meaning of copper mantra, yantra? It is at this time Mayava will end His task. Yet, 
in order for Amma to attain Poornam, whol eness, she and her Husband will once again 
☪    @  
    9    
 
61 
 
descend on Bhooloka. After Amma has His darshan, greater fortune and benefit will 
come to the world.  
Age 79 - This is the period when Amma’s life comes to an end. At that time, she 
will preach spiritual instructi ons through her disciples on earth. In order to do this, she 
will make one disciple her heir and announce it to all. Then at the age of 80, she will 
attain the full Mukthi state and then leave her body. At this time, when there is no body, 
the Atma will be come a jyothi and merge into Mayava’s chest. Then Mayava will also 
become a jyothi, the two jyothis will be seen in a vision and tell the people that they will 
descend again. After they leave the world, disciples will receive spiritual instruction and 
upadesh through dream. It is through the chanting of their auspicious mantra by the 
entire world that they will come again; it will pull them to earth. When they come again 
on earth, they will make a Shakthi Yuga. In that age, though Mayava will be a Brahmin, 
He will be like a Kshatriya King. He will wage a war against injustice and cut through all. 
The entire world will become happy, seeing Him remove injustice from the world. At 
this time, there will be no blemishes.  
These are the words of Thirumoolar.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
62 
 
 
BHRIGU NADI  
Date: 31 May 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu  
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
I offer worship to You, the Lord who measures the entire world with one foot. You, 
who have come as ten Avatars in one, the Lord who taught many arts and gave clarity to 
the Pandavas, oh Lord, I bow down to Your feet.  
I will now tell of one daughter’s life. As she wanted to tell of the Krishna Avatar (of 
He who measures the world with one foot) and witness His descent, she is born. She is 
born in the Tamil year Vegudhanya in the month of Ipasi on the seventh day, a Sunday. 
She is born on the day of Amavasya, the sun and moon together, Tula Rasi, at a good 
time. She was born to good parents and came as a child to Bhooloka. She is born into a 
rich family where she wanted for nothing. At a very young age, she had a desire for God 
and the spiritual path. As a child, she became enchanted by Krishna with no blemishes 
to this fullness in her devotion. Even though this was so, she agreed to a marriage as her 
parents desired. She lived a family life with her husband and one daughter and two sons.  
Mayava functioned as her husband in a sweet way, kindling more Prema in her. 
Though she had her husband, she had more interest in God and asked, ‘Why am I in this 
state?’ It  was Mayava who played with her in this way and many other ways. All this 
caused her great worry.  
Later, Mayava began to speak with her in meditation. He revealed all and told, 
“You are only born from and for Me. You are an aspect of Me.”  
In this birth, Mayava Kanna has no union with wife, no wife yoga; He did not have 
a family life. As He did not stay with the family, His life continued with a veil of maya. 
Now, at the age of 73, this veil of maya is removed.  
But, Mayava disappeared like a dream.  His le aving is the only thought in your 
mind; this thought is coming again and again. Though His physical form has left, His 
Atma is always with you, always near you, it is rounding you. It is due to your hue and 
cry that He will come once again to Bhooloka. How  you saw Him then, you will see Him 
again. The happiness this gives will be with you until the end of your life. Having this 
vision, you will be happy.  
☪    @  
    9    
 
63 
 
After this union, they will again separate. Though they will not live together, they 
will talk to each other. This conversation will give strength and uplift her. At the age of 
76, all Mother’s worries will be removed and she will be in a state of redemption. 
Whatever she thinks will happen. It is only at this time, when God comes that she will 
become wholesome. At the age of 77, the entire world will praise Amma. Though in this 
birth there is no marriage with Swami, she has the role of wife. All say that she is verily 
Swami’s wife.  
Swami now tells: 
 “I want to tie the Mangala Sutra on you, but I am not able to. I will put kumkum on 
your forehead. Then, in front of all I will tell, ‘She belongs only to Me’.”  
After this, all in the world will accept her. At this time auspicious music will play. 
Then in front of saints, sages, administration and disciples, He  will tell that He belongs 
only to you. It is only then that all people will accept you. They will place all Mother’s 
books inside the Prasanthi Book Shop.  
At the age of 82, Amma will have a peetam inside Prasanthi Nilayam. It is at this 
time she will attain the Mukthi State and leave the world. When she descends again, she 
will live a married life with her Lord. At that time there will be no worries, all that she 
has thought will be fulfilled.  
At the age of 73, Swami will appear in a vision to Amma and m ake a promise that 
life will now be good. Those who are with her now, her disciples, are all sharing in and 
helping her with her mission. The Mukthi that she attains will be granted to all those 
who are with her. Her disciples will also get Mukthi when she does.  
 
 
 
 
Sage Bhrigu 
☪    @  
    9    
 
64 
 
 
ROMARISHI NADI  
Date: 31 May 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu  
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
Before telling the nadi, the Rishi offers worship to Vinayaka.  
The impression on the thumb has the Kalasa Rekha, this is a divine aspect and  
gives her the power to attract all. She has both ‘observation power and tower’*. She is 
born in this state into a good family and was a good child. The family was rich, wanting 
for nothing. She was married at a young age and had children, living as a hous eholder. 
However, she left this life. This renouncing of family life caused her some suffering and 
worry. However, after this and until now, she does not worry for that family.  
The Siddhi state comes before the state of Mukthi. It is in this state that on e knows 
many things; one has knowledge of Devic secrets. This is termed Siddhis. A divine secret 
is called Siddhi; the one who knows these secrets is called a Siddha.** 
She is Mahalakshmi who has descended in physical form. In order to get clarity a 
guru is needed. The guru for Mahalakshmi is only Mahavishnu. It is He alone who gives 
clarity to her. It is through the grace of Mayava, Mahavishnu, that wisdom comes and 
the disturbances of the mind are removed and clarity comes. Yet, even if she has this 
clarity of mind, as Mayava is not here, she is filled with worry. Thus, Baba will surely 
come within two months. When He comes, she will see with the outer eyes, what she 
now sees with the inner eye. When she sees Him, all her worries will be removed and her 
mind will become clear. After this, her powers will increase and increase and not only 
will she prosper, but those who are with her will have peace and spiritual prosperity. 
Mukthi Nilayam will become peaceful. She will live in the building that has been 
constructed for her. Now her hair is falling more, there is no fullness, yet she does not 
take care of this. At this time, she will have the darshan of Parashakthi. After this, the 
grace of Parashakthi will flow to her and all her worries will be fully removed.  
At the age of 76, Mayava’s curtain, the veil of Maya will be removed. He will then 
bestow His sparshan, touch feeling on her. After receiving this touch feeling, Mother’s 
Mukthi Yoga, will increase more. She will realize fully who she is. Her heart wil l unite 
with that of the husband and the two will live in union and prosperity. At this age of 76, 
due to this auspiciousness, she will go to Prasanthi Nilayam and offer worship to Him 
there. Then all those in Deva Loka and Bhooloka will be wonderstruck, ‘ What is this?’ 
Mayava will then tell who is in His heart. It is only then th at Mother’s suffering and 
☪    @  
    9    
 
65 
 
yearning will come to an end. After this yearning finishes, she will fully bestow her 
blessings to humanity. She secures the grace of 33 crores of devas a nd attains the power 
to transform and correct the earth, bringing fulfillment to the Age.  
Now this Bhooloka is moving toward the next yuga. You are the wife of Swami, 
who is the Avatar. You are the Avatar of Lakshmi. Your life is to make all in the world 
happy; then only this birth will end. Here Romarishi ends.  
 
Notes:  
 *‘Her thumbprint shows both observation power and tower’. This means that I 
know Divine secrets that  are 'Beyond the Vedas '. These are God’s secrets. The tower 
indicates that which is at  a high level.  I am able to observe, see at a high level that 
which is divine and beyond the reach of others.  
 
 **Siddha means one who attains; they know divine secrets, which are called 
Siddhis.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
66 
 
 
RAJARISHI VISWAMITRA NADI 
Om Maha Ganapathi, Om Namo Narayana, Om Sai Ram 
 
Date: 31 May 2011  
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai - General Kaandam 
 Here, Viswamitra, the Rajarishi, is telling all details. We have searched and the 
explanation is as follows. Le t us first offer a prayer to God. For your nadi, Rajarishi 
prays to Lord Shiva, who tells: 
She is born in the year, Vegudhanya year, month of Ipasi, 7 th day, a Sunday. This 
Amavasya, a new moon day. The Sun, Moon, Rahu and Mercury are all in Thula or Libra 
Rasi. The position of the nine planets that are ever moving in Space means she is born in 
Dhanush lagna, Sagittarius.  
This means that no one was able to know of your Supreme state when you were 
born. There is no one to tell your father and mother about y ou. You have led and are 
leading your life in thoughts of Swami. He is the Lord to whom you have totally offered 
your life. This is the purpose of your life only. 
In the middle, you had a married life. Yet, you have left this also. Though it was a 
divine m arriage, your mind could not accept it. You did not desire it and you were  
pushed into that state. You were always only worshipping God, in thoughts of God, 
living in Divine Yoga or union. You lived like this in the world, but did not know of your 
true sta te. It is destined that you would only come to know all these things through 
Bhagavan Sri Sathya Sai Baba. This is the Law of Destiny. You are destined to know 
through Him only. You have never had the state of living with Him, this will not happen 
now. You  always worry about the world. You have been brought to this world for the 
benefit of mankind.  
You came to this world and were bound by family and relatives. This is also your 
destiny. Your ties and attachment to them was compulsory. Yet, little by little , you freed 
yourself from all bondage and came out. You were destined to live this life and were 
brought up in this way. Sometimes there has been confusion, yet, you always pray and 
offer worship to God for clarity.  
You are now in your 73 rd year. It is at  this time you are destined to see the nadi. 
Now the companion and support you had on this earth is no longer here. Your real 
husband, Mahavishnu, is now no longer in Bhooloka. Though His Atma left His physical 
☪    @  
    9    
 
67 
 
body, the same Atma will come again and attai n the same physical form. This is destiny. 
It will show the power and strength in Swami’s body. When Swami comes again, He will 
not be in an aged body or a young body, but middle aged. It is destined that Swami will 
only see her in this body. This great go od fortune will happen within three years, it will 
happen by the age of 76.  
She is destined to leave Bhooloka with all powers of Mahalakshmi, possessing her 
full auspicious nature. It is for this reason only that this Maya Krishna, Swami, is doing 
some Maya tricks. He left His body, but will come again in the same form. It is for this 
reason alone He has performed this Maya trick. It is only when she leaves the earth that 
He will also leave. After that (in Prema Sai Avatar), whatever she wants, Swami will 
fulfill. As the husband fulfills the desires of the wife, He will fulfill all her desires.  
When she leaves this earth, there will be no place for Him here. This time will be 
the blossoming of the Sai Yuga. You both will disappear. This marks the start of the Sai 
Yuga. This will happen in her 83 rd year. The yuga will change only when she reaches the 
age of 83. Kali Yuga has not finished; only one part has ended. Then, another part of 
Kali Yuga will change into Sai Yuga.  
Next, in the Sai Yuga they will live  on earth as husband and wife. A child will be 
born. They live a family life, but they will live with Jnana Yoga. Previously, they were as 
the Krishna and Radha Avatar. In this yuga, they are again as Krishna and Radha. In the 
next birth, they will be like  Rama and Sita Avatar with a child. They will live together. 
Now until December, there will be some mind disturbance. After Saturn moves away, 
her mind will change. It is told in this nadi. It is from then prosperity will take place. 
There will be no worri es or confusions. She will then go and sit in the building that has 
been constructed for her.  
In this Bhooloka at the age of 76, Swami will put kumkum on Mother’s forehead. 
At that time, He will announce her to the whole world. This is the moment He will 
declare her identity to the whole world. Just as in marriage, the girl is introduced to the 
world, Swami will introduce her to the world at this time. This event will happen in her 
76 year. He will only speak at this time, because this is the time when the  people will 
accept her. These two years are also a testing time for Swami. At the age of 76, her books 
will be placed in the bookstore in Prasanthi without any obstacles.  
She will have no mind, body difficulty or problems; she will be without harm in her 
own place. After the age of 78, the grace of all the devas will be there. At this time in 
Swami’s play, all 33 crores of devas will bless. At that time, there will be a big 
celebration for her here (Mukthi Nilayam) and for Swami there (Prasanthi Nilayam).  
Yet, He will be at one side, she on the other. All in the world will celebrate. At the age of 
82 to 83 that period of life, she goes to Swami. When she is there, her life force will 
separate from her, become a jyothi and enter His body. He will also leave  from the earth 
at that time. They will both show their jyothi forms to the world. It is only from that time 
that the Shakthi Yuga will come.  
☪    @  
    9    
 
68 
 
PULASTHYA NADI 
Date: 5 August 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
I bow down t o Lord Ganesha and give this Sukshma Kaandam of Mother. She is 
born in the Vegudhanya year, Ipasi month, seventh Sunday, under the Chitra star. Her 
birth shows she is a supreme Avatar. Thus, Mahavishnu came as her husband, 
descending on Bhooloka as her hus band. She is Saraswathi, who lives with all Shakthis, 
blessings and powers, yet, she is performing all rituals and poojas according to the 
Vedas. As the Lord of Alagarkoil wanted to ‘steal her’, she lives in His place. His place is 
in Andhra. Thus, she always has a struggle with her mind.  
It is only when she meets Swami that she will know of her state. Swami will tell 
that He is the one who came in the form who married her, but they had no touch 
feelings so that again they will come to the earth and take b irth. When He again 
descends on earth, Mother will have a vision of Him. After this, their life will be 
supreme. At this time, her name and fame will spread all over earth  and mankind will 
benefit.  
In the last moments, they will then show their vision to the world and then 
disappear. Mother will disappear. After that the Kallazhagan, the Lord of Alagarkoil, 
(Sathya Sai Baba) follows her with His army. He will enter the river with His army and a 
flood will come, all disappearing. This is the nadi of Pulasthya.  
 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
69 
 
 
PUSKAN NADI 
Date: 5 August 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
Now I bow down at lotus feet of Lord Shiva, Puskan tells his Mother’s nadi. I will 
tell as a witness of Mother’s birth. She is born in the year  of Vegudhanya, month of 
Ipasi...etc. She is born and descended in human form. She wanted to marry Kanha, but 
father and mother said it is not possible. She then agreed to marry. She married and 
took up the life of a householder. She had full blessings of her mother and father. The 
one who came as her husband was Mayava’s holy form. She had a married life with 
Mayava and children were born. She was very worried, then God talked to her. He then 
left His body. He is now no longer in physical form on this eart h. Amma is no longer 
able to see His physical form. Due to this, she is filled with sorrow and sadness.  
He will now come again to the earth through a new happening, a new event. For 
this to happen, He requires the help of Mother. It is through Mother’s he lp that the 
world will witness this new event. At that time, Mother and God will be together as bride 
and groom with garlands around their neck. This will happen on the day of Shivarathri. 
At this time, the entire world will be filled with surprise and won der at the wonderful 
event that will happen. It is only then the entire world will accept Mother. Then all the 
books that she has written will reach Prasanthi Nilayam. All Mother’s disciples and 
companions will be happy to have Mother and God’s darshan. Th en disciples and 
devotees on both sides will wait calmly until the final day comes and all finishes. 
 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
70 
 
 
SATTAI MUNI NADI 
Date: 5 August 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
Sattai Muni: I bow down to the feet of Shi va, who dances the divine dance. I am 
telling in one sentence what my duty to tell her is. She is destined to have darshan, 
sparshan and sambashan. She has the good fortune to have the Supreme vision many 
times; however, it is not the time now. So when will the time come? In three weeks time, 
the Avatar’s name will be revealed. But at that time, there will be some confusion; 
someone may falsely claim that that the name belongs to them. So, it will take two 
months for the Avatar to fully reveal Himself. 
After this, Mother’s sadness will be removed and come to an end. At that time, her 
true disciple will come and through him, she will get many messages from Swami. He 
will search here and there, to gather news about Swami coming. Through him, a big 
revelation of Swami, Mayava, will be known. He will come to know about the true form 
of Mayava. He has the merit to know Mayava’s true form and Amma will then know. He 
has the fortune to be the messenger between Amma and Swami. He will carry many 
messages between them. He has the name of Narayana, the one who Deva Rishi Narada 
is always praising. It is only after this that Mother’s trouble will end. When Mother 
leaves the earth, this disciple will also leave. He will be the first disciple of all other 
disciples. He will not reveal himself outwardly. Mayava himself will tell who he is. In one 
birth, he was like Lava and Kusha to the Avatar. Thus, in this birth, he has the fortune to 
attain Mukthi, but only in his very old age.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sattai Muni 
☪    @  
    9    
 
71 
 
 
GORAKKA NADI 
Date: 5 August 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
I offer worship to Parvathi Devi. I, Gorakka, will now tell Mother’s Nadi. The time 
the nine planets were roaming in the sky, you were sitting atop the lotus flower as 
Dhanalakshmi, the go ddess of wealth. You then came to the earth and were born. Sun, 
Moon, Mercury and Rahu are all together in your birth sign, Libra, etc. It is in this way, 
you were born as a good child to your mother and father. At the time of seeing this nadi 
your age is 73. You were married and had children who have all grown up. You were 
married to Mayava Krishna, but after marriage, you were always sad. Now at the time 
the nadi is being read, you are undergoing more suffering in the body.  
It is only if she sees Swami t hat Mother’s body will become healthy again. Mother 
is destined to hold His hand. It is at this time the people of the world will celebrate the 
happiest day. Swami will then take Mother’s hand and explain to all her state and fame. 
It is at this time, Maya va’s adopted son will always be with Him. It is through him that 
Mother will enjoy happiness. It is at the time Mother and Mayava are separate that he 
will be the messenger. It is through him that she will receive all messages. They will 
exchange messages through him. Mother and Swami talk in meditation. She will finally 
leave the earth with her husband. After they leave, this adopted son, their disciple, will 
show the path. The two will then bestow the vision, Atma Darshan, their form without 
physical body . Next, the two will be born and live as householders. They will enjoy a 
Supreme life. It is at this time their birth attains totality, wholeness. After the Shakthi 
Yuga ends, the age will once again return to Kali.  
 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
72 
 
 
NARADA MUNI NADI 
Date: 5 August 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
Narada Muni offers worship to Krishna Paramatma and will now tell Mother’s nadi.  
My Mother is born on the earth.*  Her mind from birth until now is only on God. 
Now at the time of seeing this nadi, she is 73 years old. In the middle of her life, my Lord 
made many, many mayas. He made her doubt about her marriage, but Mayava cleared 
them all and the doubts left. Now at the age of 73 years, her state is very sorrowful. Like 
Sita wanting to see Ayodhya, she wants to see her Lord in the physical body. 
Yet, my Lord is showing His maya works; His physical body cannot be seen. Now 
He will reveal Himself to Mother within three weeks. She will then have a vision of Him 
within three full moons, months . This bestows on her the great good fortune of uniting 
with Him in Vaikunta. Her life will then blossom more; however, there will be some 
difficulties in between. Yet, surely, Swami will remove all through His direct 
intervention, telling about her and exp laining her state. In this way, He will remove any 
misunderstanding. 
He will declare she is an Avatar of Sita. This will cause some confusion in the 
hearts of the people. Then Swami will again explain her state and perform a great 
miracle in front of the common people. Only after this will people realize who Mother is. 
Her name and fame will flourish. Then they will install Amma’s image in Mayava’s place 
and will perform pooja for both of them there. It is at this time that both armies, 
organizations, will function as one. It is at this time Mother’s body will become free from 
all defects and diseases.  
In Amma’s last moments, her body will become a jyothi in front of her beloved 
Lord, her husband. After this Mayava will also leave and His army follow. A dis ciple will 
then come, who they will appoint, who is connected to them. He will follow the path of 
worship. He will have the vision of the Atma. It is in this way that Truth and Shakthi will 
be established in the world. Mother and Swami will then be born ag ain in the next 
Avatar, in a place where the Kaveri River flows. It is at this time, the five rivers will unite 
to become one. The south and north will balance , the south rising up to become higher 
than the north. After this, the Shakthi Yuga will become c omplete. These are the words 
given to me by Mayava. 
*planetary positions, time and date same as given before.  
☪    @  
    9    
 
73 
 
 
ASHTABANDANAR SIDDHA NADI  
Date: 5 August 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
I bow down to Lord Shiva’s feet and give the reading of this faultless Mother. She is 
born to a father and mother who were great souls. The family into which she was born is 
also flawless. The birth she has taken is also without blemish. She lived like a queen in 
her house. She was marri ed and had children. However, prior to this she wanted to 
marry her Lord. Thus, He came to fulfill her prayer. After marriage, she still had some 
sadness. It was only then the Lord revealed the truth, He Himself, the Avatar, had come 
to marry her. Still he r sadness did not leave. This sadness remains until now, as the 
Avatar has left His physical body.  
When is the time for her to see His physical form again? In two months time, 
Mother’s sadness will be removed. She will have marriage with her Lord. All men tal 
suffering will leave and she will have a happy union. At that time, the Lord will appear 
on this earth in physical form. After two months, the Lord will come in physical body. 
This will make her very happy. She will have great joy in two or three month ’s time. It is 
at this time there will be an exchange of messages between them. Through this exchange 
of messages, the suffering will reduce. However, there will still be some separation. 
Swami will give all an explanation of her state; He will clearly tell who she is.  
In this way, all the confusion among people will be removed. Swami will reveal that 
Mother was Sita. Even though there are many Swami could choose, He will use Sita’s 
name. Just as Sita was separated from Rama, Mother was separated from Him.  In this 
birth, there is union with Swami in the mind and heart, but not physically. There is 
separation on earth. In her last moments, she will leave alone with the Avatar. At that 
time, the Lord will leave in water along with his disciples.  
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
74 
 
 
BHRIGU NADI 
Date: 5 August 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
Bhrigu Muni speaks: I bow down to the Mother who holds the veena and I am 
giving the reading. I bow down to Goddess Saraswathi and Lord Perumal. 
After the age of 13, her prajnana knew the purpose of her Avatarhood. It was from 
this time her love for her Lord Kanha began. However, she listened to the words of her 
father and mother and according to the laws of Bhooloka, she married. This was all the 
leela of my Lord Mayava only.  
He is the main reason for the divine leela. Although she married, she did not have 
married life. It was not a householder’s life, but that of a sanyasi. The Lord was very 
pleased by her life of renunciation and bestowed many visions on her. M ayava came in 
her meditations and showed many divine leelas to Mother. It is through these visions He 
preached to her and gave her assurances. Yet, Mother remained sad.  
It is now at this time, her Lord is no longer in the physical body. He will come 
again in a new body. This will be an auspicious day for Mother. This vision will give her 
great joy. It is from this time no faults will come near her. Swami will declare, who she 
is. It is for this her place will become Shakthi Mukthi Nilayam. The place will f lourish 
and many will become her disciples and sit near her. It is in this way  that Mayava will 
remove the veil and reveal her true form. She and the Lord will appear as Lord Perumal 
and Mother Lakshmi. They will be no faults from this time onward. They wi ll perform a 
great yagna together and remove the evil of Kali. Their state is like the two poles; both 
are not in the same place. Thus, they make a new language  and speak in the same way. 
Until now Mayava, spoke beautiful Telegu, He will now come again and sp eak in the 
same language as Mother (Tamil). After He comes, there will be no shortcomings. At 
that time, the two ashrams will perform yagnas to spread their name and fame.  
At the age of 78, Mayava will give Mukthi to Mother. At this time, in front of all, He 
gives all the vision of how Mother’s body changes into a jyothi and disappears. He will 
then also disappear like Mother in the form of a jyothi. At that time, His form will be like 
the brilliant effulgent sun. His disciples will carry Him on a palanqui n on their 
shoulders and His form will become a jyothi and disappear in water. At this time, those 
who have come for His task will follow Him. Kali’s Maya will be removed. It is at this 
time the leelas of the God and Goddess will be fulfilled. Sathya becomes victorious. All in 
the world will know God is Truth . Sathya is Truth. When they are born again, Sathyam 
will be fulfilled, fully and totally. This is Bhrigu telling to Devi. 
☪    @  
    9    
 
75 
 
 
BOGAR NADI  
Date: 5 August 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
Bogar offers worship to Muruga and tells, ‘I will tell of Mother’s reality’. She is 
born as Sita Avatar. This Avatar is born in the month of Ipasi, Rasi (Libra), Sunday, 
Dark day, Amavasya, Chitra star. She is born as a child to a good f ather and mother. She 
descended on Bhooloka as their child. She is born under the Chitra star, which gives 
Mukthi with the blessings of the Saptha Rishis. She possesses full knowledge, without 
ever having been taught. Mayava Himself married her through a t rick of maya; children 
were born to them also.  
When will He now give darshan to her? This will happen on a full moon day, from 
now to third full moon. He will show His vision within three full moons. How will He 
look? Like Lord Muruga, beautiful! He will have the same beauty as Lord Muruga’s 
body. When He comes, your curtain of maya will be removed. Maya means your 
sadness. At that time, Mother will continue to have some physical sufferings. If she 
meets Him, the suffering in the body will remain until th ey touch. O nly His sparshan 
removes all her sufferings and disease.  
At that time, she will be filled with enthusiasm. They will then both preach 
individually to all the reason why they have come. He will not reveal the reason why He 
left His task half way,  without completing it. He left without telling the reason. Yet, 
when He now calls her He will reveal who she is and will show that her place is His own 
place.  
On the day of Mahashivarathri, He will call her to His place and in front of all who 
have gathered there, tell who she is. He will reveal the reason why she has been born on 
Bhooloka. At this time, all the common people and true disciples will accept this. 
Mother’s books will then go to Swami’s place. All those who worship Swami will also 
worship Amma. I do not have the heart to tell of Mother’s leaving the earth, her end. 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
76 
 
 
PULIPAANI SIDDHA NADI 
Date: 5 August 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
I offer worship to Ayyappa, who is born to Hari and Hara. (He the n speaks about 
the position of the nine planets in the sky at that time.)  
At the time Vasantha Sai was born on this earth, there were no shortcomings. She 
is born at the same time  that Lord Muruga killed Soorapadma, springtime. She is born 
with the help o f Shakthi with the full blessings of Parvathi Devi. Mayava is also born in 
this time. Though they are two poles apart, they speak heart to heart , exchanging 
thoughts at the level of the mind. Due to planetary positions, she is always sad and 
Mayava had no marriage yoga. Though she has marriage Yoga, it is not marriage. They 
are not together. She secured good blessings in her young age; she then renounced all. 
As He cannot do, He created another body near her and through that form married. 
Though married and a householder, her mind was filled with renunciation. She was like 
a mad person for many years. It was Mayava Himself who has given the explanation for 
this telling, “You are in Me, I am in you. Wherever I descend, I attain you.”  
Thus, one body was with Amma, as her husband, another on the other side, in 
another place. His mind is in one place, His body in another, so two bodies.  
He has made another body in which He will come and give her darshan when He 
returns. When He comes again, all will see them in  union in the married state. Yet, she 
will not live as a householder. It will only be a life of renunciation. In Amma’s body, she 
realizes Swami’s body feelings. It is only when she experiences this body touch feeling 
that she will be happy. Whatever she w rites, she tells to the disciple and these are given 
to Swami. To leave all this Mayava leela to happen accordingly, I, Pulipaani, tell and let 
the play unfold. 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
77 
 
 
MACCHAMUNI NADI 
Date: 5 August 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
I offer worship to Vinayaka and Murugan. I, Macchamuni, am telling this nadi 
with the blessings of Agasthya. Mother is born in the Vegodhanya, Ipasi month, Chitra 
star, on a Sunday. All this has been told to Macchamuni, who is writing, by Aga sthya. 
Mother’s name is Vasantha Sai and is also Vasantham. Sai has connected to her name, 
so Vasantha Sai. It is on this Bhooloka that Sai is her husband. Yet, she has not been 
united with Him on Bhooloka. The two have never united and are both sitting in  their 
own places. The Mayava, who descended here, showed His maya work and left the earth. 
This has increased Mother’s sadness even more. There is not only sadness, but also 
physical body suffering. As there is disease in her intestine, she is unable to t ake food. 
She will only become well when she sees the form of Mayava. She will then fully recover. 
She will only fully recover when she has the vision of Mayava. It is for this that He will 
soon come.  
He will then descend here, His body being the age of 5 8 to 60 years of age. He will 
be reborn on this earth in a body of this age. Only then, will He reveal Himself to the 
world and all will know the truth. Mother will also give a vision, but the vision of Mother 
and Swami together for the people will only happen after sometime.  
At the age of 76, Mother and Swami will live together and show to all their true 
state. It is at this time their disciples will attain liberation. It is at this time, one will have 
Yoga Maya and stay together with Swami as a disciple and give messages to her from 
Him. He has the same name as Mayava. Agasthya tells that just as he has Macchamuni 
Siddha, there will be one disciple there for Mother and Swami. It is He who gives 
messages to Amma. Though this is so, there will also be some sadness for this disciple 
here with Mother, as though he has clarity of thought, he never attains Siddhi. When 
Mayava descended, this disciple was in a state of wholeness; he never lived as a 
householder, but lived a life of renunciation. This sadness was due to the disciple’s wife. 
The wife will herself come to Mother and become his disciple. Thus, I tell in this way.  
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
78 
 
 
KUDUMBAI SIDDAR NADI  
Date: 5 August 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai 
I touch and bow down to the feet of Parvathi Devi. I, Kudambai, am telling about 
one daughter’s birth. She is the deity who lives in Heaven. She has ‘Banana Yoga’, like 
the lineage as bananas grown (an expanding nature). Accordingly, she must 
demonstrate this base in her life; th is is her destiny. In no previous birth did she have a 
fully householder life. In this birth, householder life became Moksha, higher liberation. 
For whom? For all those who are born from the stomach, they have the liberation.*  
Whom she married, He is Maya va. He lives His own way, but, whatever she thinks 
to do, He does. Yet, they have separation. It was as householder, but they lived with 
renunciation. After childbirth, it was only renunciation. Her womanhood was fulfilled at 
a young age, but her Bhooloka womanhood was not complete. Before leaving the young 
age, it become wholesome; otherwise, many insults would come. But she crossed all and 
only contemplated on God, worshipping Him. Still, she had only sadness. He was not 
destined to be together with Amma.  
So, Swami showing His maya work left the body, but He  will take another body. 
That will happen 6o days after having left the body. After He descends, then within three 
full moon days, He will see Mother. 
Only at age 75 will they see each other in person and exchange their feelings. By 
the age of 76 years, Amma has no blemish in her body. She is like an active child, her 
actions going here and there. 
After 76, she will see Him. After they unite, they will have the married state. Like a 
bride and groom with  garlands, they give a vision to all. At that time on my father 
Shiva’s special day (that is Shivarathri), those in the world and all human beings see that 
vision. All will offer worship and spread the news all over the world.  
Mahalakshmi attains Mayava’s body. Mayava will then go with His disciples in a 
car and make a miraculous exit from the world through water. This is how Mother will 
attain her liberation. Kudambai Siddhar ends the nadi on this note. 
Notes:  
*All will be reborn to the Vishwa Brahma Gar bha Kottam, the Universal womb. 
All are born from there as jeevan mukthas in the new creation.  
☪    @  
    9    
 
79 
 
 
IDAI KADAR SIDDHAR NADI 
Date: 5 August 2011 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading of Sri Vasantha Sai - Jeeva Nadi 
Sivamayam  
Om Mahaganapati Tunai 
Om Namo Narayana  
 This is the reading for the Divine Mother Vasantha Amma in response to the 
current difficulties she is undergoing. Swami, Himself, tells the verse: 
It is due to the power of attraction of a woman  - i.e. Shakthi - that I will come 
to be in a di fferent body. It will be a Divine body and I will reveal myself  in the 
Atmic level. At that time, I would have left this physical body and will come 
again to Bhooloka in a Divine body on earth.  
 
This vision of My divine form is due only to the attraction of a woman and 
her hue and cry. The sound of her heart -rending cries is  creating the 
circumstance and the moment for this body to reappear on the earth. She is 
such a Maha Shakthi. 
Again, Swami Himself tells,  
As long as she remains in the state of Sumanga li, showing this state with 
kumkum I will continue to appear in this body. The moment she chooses to 
remove this kumkum, this body will be ready to leave; such is the state of this 
form. This body is such that if there is any threat to her married status o r if her 
Atma leaves this earth, this body will leave the earth that very moment. The 
moment her life force leaves the body, the life force in this body will also leave 
at the same moment. Many will say that this is divine action. Just as doctors 
pronounce ‘Medical Miracle’, this will be called as a ‘God miracle’; a divine 
wonder. Her love for Him is in such a high state that it makes His life force 
leave His body the moment the life force leaves hers. 
Both of them have the power of Idai Kadar. This fact ha s been revealed earlier 
itself. They have been creating certain circumstances for this to happen. One may ask 
what sort of happening. She has borne all insults silently and uplifted herself spiritually. 
Swami tells: 
You have known my true identity, but it will take some time for you to know 
yourself. You have known Me, yet for me to know you, may take some more 
time. This will only happen in our last moments. Up until that time, we will 
☪    @  
    9    
 
80 
 
remain in a state of separation from each other. You will be on one sid e, I on 
the other. We are not destined to be together and work together in this birth. 
It is for this reason you will meet people in your own way and I shall in mine.  
Swami is in such a state of purity that when He meets with others He is able to 
uplift t hem spiritually. This is part of His mission. In the same way, you make your 
disciples pure through the same path you have followed.  
Your final liberation from this birth comes at the age of 82. It is this time that both 
of you will leave the earth. At th is time, she will derive great happiness and peace of 
mind. At this time, they will meet privately and converse. They will not meet in a public 
place or meditation hall. Even though it has been told that she will see Him, have a 
vision of Him, when will th is personal meeting take place? It will happen within three 
years. After this meeting and conversation, she will return to her life of solitude. Amma 
is destined to leave her body before her 82nd year.  
There is a chance they will unite in the 75 th year. It has been said that this union is 
due to her hue and cry only. It is likely He will return. Swami tells: 
 Sometimes she is in a state of being in my thoughts without crying. Another 
state is when she is melting in thoughts of me and yet a third state , she 
torments herself in thoughts of me. Amma is now in this third state, a state of 
self-destruction. She must now come out of this state and attain her goal.  
What is this goal? For what reason have Swami and Amma taken birth on this 
earth? It is to redeem p eople of the world and to explain to them the subtle meanings of 
life. What is the purpose of life? The purpose of life is to find out the subtle and inner 
meaning of it. Only when all know the inner meaning of life can one move away from 
their present state of existence; acquire good qualities and live life with dignity without 
animal qualities. Animal qualities are more prevalent in man in this Age of Kali. When 
one becomes free from these negative qualities, then those things, which were thought 
to be important, will no longer be necessary. Mother has only descended here in order to 
create an environment and the circumstances where this can happen. So far, the time 
has not come where she is able to complete this task. It is only in the next yuga. 
Why has she not moved into the Vishwa Brahma Garbha Kottam? Swami tells: 
This is in no way due to any fault in construction or anything to do with 
Vaastu. All is only according to time. The construction and Kumbhabhishekam 
were completed and performed when I was i n the physical form. In the same 
way, when you once again see me in physical form, you will then be able to 
reside therein.  
In regards to those with you, each one has been brought to earth for a specific task. 
After completion of their assigned duty, only then will they leave this earth.  
 
 
Om Sri Sai Ram 
☪    @  
    9    
 
81 
 
 
Additional Important Nadi Readings and Notes 
  
KAGABHUJANDAR NADI 
for the MUKTHI STUPI 
Date: 29 December 2003 
Place: Kanchipuram, Tamil Nadu 
Reading for the Mukthi Stupi 
THE MUKTHI STUPI - The Scepter of Liberation 
The first nadi reading regarding the construction of the pillar at Mukthi Nilayam 
as given by the Sage Kagabhujandar. 
I prostrate to the Lord who is the servant of all devotees; the Lord who is in 
Thirupaarkadal (Ocean of Milk), in the Holy land of Sothiyampaakkam -Paavoor, in 
Kanchipuram of the blessed Thondai region. 
I am going to explain the great text, Siddhar Sivagama shastra (special scripture on 
temple architecture) in detail. Kindly listen. 
The place where Meenakshi (Angayarkanni) lives; that which is at the outskirt s of 
Pandyanaadu (Madurai); that which is the Bhooloka Vaikunta, Heaven on earth; that 
which is the bridge between earth and Heaven; that which is called the sacred 
Melakkottai (the village where Mukthi Nilayam is situated):  
She who is living in this sacr ed land is known as Vasantha, the woman who has 
founded the blessed Mukthi Kottam, the Kingdom of Mukthi. She is the one ruling it 
with divine grace. 
She, who has become the half of God, has prayed and secured this boon from God 
to construct the Thoopastha mba, (the pillar) which is the Thoothu vayil, ‘the message 
gate’ with Sai Baba giving the Words of Truth.  
My dear disciple Gorakka, kindly listen!  
I, Kagabhujandar, the one who is the Adi Guru  (the first guru) of the world,  am 
giving here the Jnana Shrut hi (words of wisdom). For the reason that through the 
perfect Dharma Chakra Pillar (wheel of dharma pillar), the people of the world should 
be blessed with Mukthi. 
☪    @  
    9    
 
82 
 
In the Deva sabha (court of Heaven), Venkatesh Rajan performed penance and 
accrued Punya bal a (the merit of good deeds) through which he secured, the Mukthi 
Kohl, ‘The sceptre of Mukthi’. 
I will show you in the path of the Guru’s grace how to construct its reflection here. 
Kindly listen. 
I am blessing to begin the building work in the place in wh ich she is thinking to 
construct it. 
The soil of twenty -five sacred temples should be collected through the guru who is 
giving these words of wisdom. 
Go pooja (worship of cows), Harishchandra pooja should be performed and the 
building work should be started. 
Holy soil must be collected from twenty -five sacred temples; twenty -two must be 
from Harischandra temples, which  are the epitome of dharma constructed on my 
command by my disciple who is reading this nadi. 
The soil from the holy land of Kasi (Benares), the soil from holy land of Ayodhya, 
the soil from the holy land of Puttaparthi, where the Guru of Grace, Baba, lives must be 
collected. These should be placed in the foundations in the earth. 
 On top of which, the Dharma chakra, which has been blessed by m e, 
Kagabhujandar, should be inscribed on a golden plate and installed in the earth. 
On top of this should be installed another Dharma chakra inscribed on a wooden 
plaque made from a hundred year old Aswatta, Peepul tree. 
On top of this, the Dharma chakra s hould be inscribed on a black stone and 
installed. Then, the Pillar of Dharma must be constructed on top. 

Now, I will give you the guidelines. Kindly listen, oh guileless disciple. I will tell 
you clearly the right path to climb on the ladder of Mukthi holding the sceptre of 
dharma. 
Kindly listen! When she has followed and completed the above tasks accor ding to 
the instructions, Baba will bless with Parijatha flowers. 
By the blessings of Lord Anantha Narayana, the eternal Mukthi Nilayam will be 
built flawlessly: 
 With the seed of bhakthi, construct a twelve foot diameter circular base. 
  Within this construct a hexagonal base, it must be two feet high. 
  On top of this must be built a sixteen petal red lotus. 
  The lotus must be within a diameter of nine feet and be two feet high. 
☪    @  
    9    
 
83 
 
  Above this must be built the Dharma chakra sceptre that will ignite the  
   Jnana deep, light of wisdom. 
  It should have six sections, each two feet in height making a twelve foot  
   pillar. 
  The pillar should have a three foot diameter. 
  In the center of each of the six sections, from the top must be inscribed  
   the Adi akshara, (the eternal word of Truth), ‘Sathyabhava’. 
 As the pillar is constructed according to these instructions, the Sahasrara must be 
built on top to elevate mankind through the path of Mukthi, holding the principle of 
truth and be three feet in height with a six foot diameter. 
 On top of this, a six-foot diameter star must shine with brilliant golden light. This 
is the cremation staff held by the divine hands of King Harischandra, an embodiment of 
Truth. This is also the Sceptre of Truth held by the Golden Guru Baba. 
Gods, goddesses and all celestial beings will gather together and shower their 
blessings and gifts of grace. A star will shine in the sky and bless. 
Mukthi Nilayam will grow day by day and flourish, many wonders will happen, 
many arts will thrive. 
Here, the Lord of Puttaparthi and His divine grace will permeate all and reign 
supreme. 
The daughter of Earth, Bhooma Devi will bow down and offer worship. Dharma 
will be established and flourish. The people will realize and glorify this as the world’s 
Adi Guru Peetam (the primal abode of the Guru). 
I, Kagabhujandar, have made you clearly know these details as they are, in Truth. 
When she (Vasantha) understands these clearly, she will drink the Amrita Jnana, 
the nectar of Wisdom, which is never decreasing.  
Even wicked alcoholics would know the path of Mukthi and will be redeemed. 
 (The disciple speaks) Oh revered Guru! You are continuously speaking these 
words of wisdom, kindly stop for a moment. I have a doubt. Please enlighten me. 
You gave the instructions  regarding the Dharma chakra, which has to be installed 
in the foundation, but you did not give the details of its measurements. Therefore, I beg 
you to kindly tell me about it. 
My dear disciple Gorakka! You asked the doubt with love, kindly listen. You ar e 
writing the rules with love given by the Lord through me. I am telling you so that you 
know. 
You must install circular yantra chakras (special inscriptions of potent mystic 
formulas) of three-foot diameter. 
☪    @  
    9    
 
84 
 
During installation, you must chant the mantra,  “Om ‘Sharavana bhava.” If this 
yantra is installed chanting this mantra with reverence and devotion, it will be flawless. 
This reading should ‘be placed at the feet of Lord Mahavishnu, who is the primal 
God source of Bhagavan Baba, at His temple in Thirup aarkadal in Kanchipuram on the 
day of Vaikunta Ekadasi in this month of Margazhi. 
This reading is given with blessings. Many glories will follow. The path of Mukthi 
to attain the Supreme abode will be laid in all divine grace. 
It is for this reason I gave you these words of wisdom with the darshan of the Lord 
through the Swarga vaasal (gateway of heaven). I bless you. My blessings will never fail. 
I bless you to truly attain the greatest virtues. 
Second nadi - 7 January 2004 
Regarding how to build the Sathy a Deepam Stambha, I will tell. This is a white 
stone, strong white stone. The stone is from the place having Thirumal, near the place 
where Baba is living. There is one holy river; it will be found in Karnataka. This must be 
started in Tamil month of Masi under the star Maham. The name of the sculptor is 
Muruga; he will do the work. The finishing time is in the month of Aavani, (July –
August). It must be finished by September; so, the time from start to finish must take 
seven nadis. Seven times, you will tak e this nadi and I will tell step by step. It will give 
crores of merit because so many obstacles will come.  
Third Nadi - 15 January 2004 
I am worshipping the God who is the Jyothi, who is the all -pervading light. I will 
worship and tell this Bhooloka how to build the Sathya Deep Stambha on Bhooloka 
Vaikunta. You take my disciple who reads the nadi with you and in 25 places take the 
holy sand and chant 1008 names offering lotuses. Then give cow charity. Through the 
power of the scepter of dharma, many, many  wonders will happen in this place. Merits 
will grace; ancient dharma lives in this place. All will happen with Baba’s blessings. The 
Stupi, Sathya Deepam Stambha becomes effulgent like a jyothi form and bestows 
Mukthi for all. This is with the blessing of  the Adi Shakthi, the seed of Mukthi. For the 
seed of the Mukthi, Adi Shakthi’s blessings are there.  
Fourth Nadi - 6 March 2004 
I am the Adi Guru Kagabhujandar. I will tell through the disciple about the Sathya 
Deepam Stambha (Mukthi Stupi) I already told  clearly how to build it. I blessed. This 
place has the power to attract wisdom; grace and blessings will pour and overflow here. 
The whole world will wonder at this outpour and flood of grace and blessings. 
Nadis five and six - 15 to 18 July 2006 
I have a lready blessed this Sathya Deepam Stambha. It is effulgent like gold and 
giving light. Again, do cow charity, build a temple for Harischandra and do Kumbha 
through him. 
☪    @  
    9    
 
85 
 
Then I will give one more nadi about the flowers for offering at the time of 
Kumbhabhishekam. Make the Devi’s statue. 
Sri Vasantha Sai added the following quote: 
“If a live explosive is kept in a place, it can explode, shattering everything in the 
surrounding area into pieces. In the same way, when the prajnanam that is 
contained in this small form explodes, it will smash the karmas of the world into 
dust. That is why Swami transferred it from this small human form to a big body of 
stone. Swami changed the Prajnanam that was in human dress to a dress of stone 
called the Mukthi Stupi.”  (from 'Principle of Becoming God' by Vasantha Sai) 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
☪    @  
    9    
 
86 
 
 
 
KAGABHUJANDAR NADI 
for the VISHWA BRAHMA GARBHA KOTTAM  
 
Date: 7 January 2010 
Place: Vaideeshwarankoil, Tamil Nadu 
Reading for the Vishwa Brahma Garbha Kottam 
The Purpose of seeing the Nadis 
For building a temple of Vedas, to remove the difficulties of people and to bestow 
on them Guru Upadesh and Jnana Upadesh. 
Construction details as given by the Nadis 
Sage Kagabhujandar gives the nadi with Bhagavan Sri Sathya Sai Baba as witness. 
It is the Vaastu Kaandam for temple construction. The temple is to be built on the 
northern side of the Stupi. It is called:  
VISHWA BRAHMA GARBHA KOTTAM   
Building details: 
Foundation - 12 x 12 ft 
Depth – 5 ft 
Foundation to be raised 5 ft above ground
Basement area – 9 x 9 ft 
Four supporting pillars  
Distance between pillars – 7 ft 
Pillar divided into two halves. Lower half is Varaha Avatar, facing down and 
Matsya Avatar on the upper half. 
Center of the roof – 3 ft diameter circle, with Valampuri  and Idampuri conch 
alongside each other. 
Gopuram or Temple Dome details: 
6 steps – 3 ft high; above this is ‘Thalai Pravaha’ – which is 7 ft high. The symbol of 
all religions is in the center. The Gopuram has the ‘Akal Vilakku’ or burning lamp design 
☪    @  
    9    
 
87 
 
with the ‘Om’ sign on either side of the dome. The ‘Thalai Kreedam’ or crown of the 
dome is 3 ft high. 
On the day of Kumbhabhishekam, the Gopuram should be covered with white 
 silk. 
The ‘Thalai Vaasal’ or main entrance should have 7 steps, each measuring 5 ft 
in length. 
If built in this way, then as a husband comes in search of the wife, Swami will 
come to see Amma. 
Notes by Sri Ganapathi Sthapati on the Vishwa Brahma Garbha Griha
The Kaala Stamba or Mukthi Stupi, which is already constructed in Mukthi  
Nilayam, is the Fire that has brought the physical body of God here as the Temple. 
The Temple should be built 1 ½ ft below the Stupi’s 5th Prakaram. 
At the Bindu  center, the main energy point of the Temple, a lamp should 
always be kept burning. 
Amma will meditate in the ‘Mukha Mantapam’, which is in front of the 
Garbha Griha. 
Amma will stay in the ‘Maha Mantapam’ next to the ‘Mukha Mantapam’. 
Benefits of the Temple of Vedas 
People will gather here for many years with deep involvement in meditatio n. 
They will meditate here blissfully and joyfully. 
Vedic chants will resound everywhere. Wisdom will spread with the brilliance 
of a million suns. 
To attain all, the mission should begin with the divine hand of Amma, the 
Chitshakthi Avatar of Bhagavan Sathya Sai. 
Amma will attain Supreme bliss and Vaak Siddhi, (her words will come true). 
By building this temple, all will attain the birthless state, Jeevan Mukthi. God will 
protect and guard. Amma will ripen and mature in wisdom and attain the supreme 
state. Good fortune will flow. This will lead all jeevas to attain supreme bliss. All 
religions will become one. All gods and goddesses will guard and support. Amma will 
reside there as the Goddess of the Five Elements. 
The four pillars in the Garbha Gri ha are the four Vedas. They will stop the 
Pralaya destruction of Kali and make it a Veda Yuga (a Sathya Yuga). 
The Garbha Kottam is also the Music Sabha, Veda Sabha, Jnana Sabha. The 
nine planets, Lord Ganapathi, Trimurthis – Lord Brahma, Lord Vishnu, Lo rd Siva 
with their respective consorts, 18 Siddhas (Perfected Souls) with their respective 
consorts, Sage Kagabhujandar, who is giving the nadi and his wife Bahuladevi, 330 
☪    @  
    9    
 
88 
 
crores of Devas, 64 Nayanmars, 12 Alwars will reside here because this is the abode  
of the Primal Soul. 
A light of wisdom will emerge from Amma through the top of the Gopuram.  
Bhagavan Sri Sathya Sai Baba Veda will resound everywhere. 
Amma’s wisdom will spread in all eight directions. Spiritual devotees will 
come from many countries, as Jnana Seva, Dhyana and Yoga will grow and flourish here. 
Amma will preach subtle 
wisdom of the Supreme Self. It 
will be wisdom beyond the Vedas 
and Upanishads; it is the 
wisdom of the Primal Soul.  
Amma’s food intake will 
reduce day by day. Established 
in Dhyana, in oneness with the 
Self, she will become a blazing 
light. 
Amma will merge in the 
Supreme Self and become 
Poornam, Supreme Absolute, 
(Samadhi State). At that time 
she will not know her own state; 
others will tell her.  
When Amma starts to 
reside in the Garbha Kottam, her 
grace will halt the many 
destructions of Kali. She will 
guard and protect the world.  
 She will bestow wisdom 
on many from the state of the 
Supreme Absolute. Her glory 
and grace will spread. 
On the day of Kumbha  
abhishekam, she will  enter the 
temple in green silk and Chandan 
Alankar, adorned with sandal. 
She will sit on the sacred peetam 
and shower her grace as Iccha 
Shakthi, Narayani, the pure hearted 
one. 
Vishwa Brahma Garbha Kottam 
Sanctum Sanctorum 
☪    @  
    9    
 
89 
 
 
VERSES OF SAGE SHRI VEERA BRAHMAM 
GARU & CONCLUSION 
Amma’s Notes on Veera Bhoga Vasantha Raya. 
At the time we were assembling this book, Rukmini from Hyderabad sent some 
predictions she had read on the internet by Sage Shri Veera Brahmam Garu on Veera 
Bhoga Vasantha Raya . He tells about the  coming of the Kalki Avatar. We too k a 
printout and found on the tenth page Swami had drawn something on one of the 
paragraphs. The paragraph read:  
With the start of Margashira Shuddha Navami 
Many strange things will spread 
Within Margashira Shuddha Purnima 
The Lady’s (earth) burdens will be finished 
Here it tells that many strange things will happen by the full moon in the month of 
Margolis. This is the ninth month and falls at the beginning of December to the 
beginning of January. It is at this time the burdens on Mother Earth will come t o an 
end. The full moon day this year, 2011, is on the 10 th December. In the next verse 
indicated by Swami, it reads: 
Time will fruit to people in the future 
In Karthika Masa, they would have 
Balachandra’s shine would not be visible 
The Sun’s glow would be low 
Let us see what else Swami wrote by the verses. There was the form of a head, with 
six chakra points. On top of the head was the seventh chakra. Vibrations indicated by 
the waving lines symbolizing touch feeling were drawn spiraling in all directions.  To the 
left side of this, ‘Sai Ram’ was written nine times. On the other side, He wrote ‘Sai Ram’ 
three times. In the middle and next to this, it was written five times. Above the word, 
‘January’, He drew a line and above that the letter J.  
What are the meanings of this writings? It is from my body that all feelings emerge 
through the Sahasrara, the seventh chakra. On one side, they go to the 9 Sai Rams, 
which indicate the nine planets. On the other side, they go to the five elements making 
all Sai Mayam. The three ‘Sai Rams’ indicate the three actions of Creation, Sustenance 
and Destruction. These three are also filled with Sai, Sai Mayam.  
☪    @  
    9    
 
90 
 
How is it all happening? It had been a long time habit of mine to write the words 
‘Sai Ram’ all over my body. I woul d do this before getting out of bed in the morning. I 
would write this with the Rudraksha bead that Swami gave to me. I now write with 
vibuthi and a ring with Swami’s form ‘Sai Ram’ all over my body. He has given the ring.  
In this way, there is only ‘Sai Ram’ in my whole body. Swami drew the Chintamani 
Mangalya and asked that we make it for the marriage of Purusha and Prakrithi. There is 
only Swami’s name on my bangles and anklet. He asked that we make heart shapes as 
the anklet and write ‘Sai Ram’ on them. 
He then drew the form of the conch, using ‘Om Sai Ram’ and asked we make conch 
shape earrings. The new toe rings also have ‘Om Sri Sai Ram’, with a heart shape on 
them. The ring also has ‘Om Sai Ram’, written on it. Through this, Swami revealed how I 
have written His name on my entire body. No one knew of this habit of mine. It is 
Swami who has asked me to make these ornaments and to write about it.  
When I expand as Prakrithi, the nine planets, five elements and three attributes all 
become ‘Sai Mayam’, filled with Sai. This is what is shown. When my body becomes the 
nine planets, they become Sai Mayam. It is the same for the five elements. To show this , 
I wear the ornaments with Sai Ram written on  them. The Sathya Yuga shows how my 
body becomes Prakrithi.  Why did I write ‘Om Sai Ram’ on my body? Has anyone else 
ever done in this way? It is through the Purusha Prakrithi marriage that my body 
expands as Prakrithi. This is the only reason only why I have written in this way. My 
every thought becomes vibration, goes out through my Sahasrara and fills the worlds.  
When Prakrithi takes human form, the five elements become her five senses, the 
nine planets the different parts of her body. The three activities are the actions 
performed through her body. According t o what is written, Swami will descend again 
between October and November. This is the reason for what He has drawn.  
Conclusion 
In this book, we have seen God's great mysterious unfolding drama. Just as each 
person has their own point of view, the saints, sages and siddhas have written according 
to their viewpoint, angle and the extent of Truth revealed to them. Though each nadi is 
different, all describe the same events, but with the individual emphasis of the sage or 
siddha. Four main themes run throughout the nadis:  
1. Swami returns in the Sathya Sai form. 
2. I am Swami's Shakthi. 
3. My body merges as a jyothi with Swami. 
4. The coming of the Sathya Yuga, the Golden Age and Prema Sai happens. 
These are all mysteries that cannot be kno wn. On page 200 of Swami's book 
'Bhagavatha Vaahini' He writes the following: 
☪    @  
    9    
 
91 
 
The will of God is mysterious; it cannot be explained by 
categories or as consequences. It is above and beyond human 
reasoning and imagination. It can be comprehended only by tho se 
who have known Him, and not by those who have acquired 
scholarship or sharp intellect. The cause and consequence are 
integrally related. 
Now let us see. The will of God cannot be known through any human knowledge. I 
have explained this in many of my books. Here is an example. For the last two and a half 
years, Swami has told He will come on many different dates. He then gave many proofs 
for His coming. He asked me to write of His coming and I eagerly waited for Him. Yet, 
He did not come. He then gave man y reasons for His not coming. Thus, His actions are 
beyond the criticism of the human mind. I only write whatever He tells me. Though it 
does not happen as He has told, there is a consequence for what He has said. How can it 
be known through human knowledg e? If you believe, you read, otherwise leave it. If the 
gods, rishis, saints and siddhas cannot know the action of God, how then can ordinary 
man? Everything in my life is like this. Even the devas and heavenly hosts cannot know 
these things. How can this ‘I without i’, know of Him.  
For an upcoming book, I wrote a chapter called ' Knowing Nothing, Knowing 
Everything' as a partial answer to the unanswerable. Just as I was writing, a proof came 
in the 'divine post' for what I had written. It can shed light on  catching a glimpse of the 
brilliance of a million suns God. 
The beauty of the unconscious is that it knows a great deal, whether 
personal or collective, but it always knows that it does not know, cannot 
say, dares not try to prove or assert too strongly, because what it does 
know is that there is always more —and all words will fall short. The 
contemplative is precisely the person who agrees to live in that unique 
kind of brightness (a combination of light and dark that is brighter 
still!). The paradox, of course, is that it does not feel like brightness at 
all, but what John of the Cross calls a “luminous darkness,” or others call 
“learned ignorance.”  
In summary, you cannot grow in the great art form, the integration 
of action  and contemplation, without (1 ) a strong tolerance for 
ambiguity, (2) an ability to allow, forgive, and contain a certain degree 
of anxiety, and (3) a willingness to not know and not even need to know. 
This is how you allow and encounter mystery. All else is mere religion. 
                      Fr. Richard Rohr, (a Franciscan brother) 

Om Sri Sai Ram 
 
 
LIST OF CURRENT 
PUBLICATIONS 
 
Liberation Here Itself Right Now Part 1 
Reincarnation of Radha as Vasantha Sai 
Radha Krishna Sangamam 
Prema Nivarana Sai 
Liberation Here Itself Right Now Part 2 
Sai Gita Pravachanam 
Liberation Here Itself Right Now Part 3 
Brindavan Satsang 
Bliss Bliss Bliss Part 1 
Bliss Bliss Bliss Part 2 
May 27 to May 27 
Miracle maya Part 1 
Gita Govindam Again Part 1 
Prema Sai Premavatar Part 1 
Beyond the Upanishads 
Prema Sai Avatar Part 2-Beyond the Vedas: 
The Supreme Absolute 
Principle of Becoming God 
Gita Govindam Again Part 2- 
Establishment of Prema 
Shiva  Shakthi  Principle  -  A  Declaration 
Last 7 Days of God 
Prema Sai Part 3 - Sai Digest 
Brahma Sutra - Part 1, 2 
Shiva Sutra - Part 1, 2 
The Sathya Yuga and Karmic Law 
Autobiography of ‘I without I’ 
Karmic Law Remedy 
Chaitanya: The Task of the Avatar & 
God and His Consort 
The Stupi Book 
Ten Avatars on One 
Taste and Vasana and Divine Blossoms 
Divine Stories 
Ananda Sutra 
My Father’s Diary – Living Gita 
How the Sathya Yuga is Coming 
Vasantha Sai Satcharita Part I, 2, 3 
Amma’s Thoughts for the Day 
Avatar’s Secret Part I, 2 
Essence of the Gita 
Vedic Principles for meditation 
Wisdom’s Mine 1 
Wisdom’s Mine 2 
Sai Sons – Seven Chakras 
Who am I? 
Who is in Swami’s Heart? 
Who is in Swami’s Heart? Part 2 - New Bliss 
Sacred Nadi Readings: Sri Sathya Sai 
Baba & Sri Vasantha Sai  
Brilliance of a Million Suns  
Experience New 
Heart Rise 
eBooks -  
 -Vishwagarbha Sai Cosmic Womb 
 
- Struggle For Truth 
 
- Highlights of the Avataric Task 
 
- Swami Has Come! 
 
- Avatar Amends 
 
- Radha Krishna Wedding Book 
 
- Countless Bodies + Countless 
Hearts Equals Brahman 
 
- Kaamadeva Becomes Jnana Rama 
 
- The Primal Stupi 
 
- Atma Satcharita 
 
-Paramatma Satcharita 
Pts.1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11, 
12,13,14 
 
For information contact: Sri Vasantha 
Sai Books & Publications Trust 
mukthinilayam@gmail.com 
svsbpt@gmail.com 