PREDICTIVE ASTROLOGY 
OF THE HINDUS 
Jyotish-Kalanidhi, Daivajna-Shiromani 
PANDIT GOPESH KUMAR OJHA, M.A., LL.B. 
Author of 
Hasta-Rekha Vijnan, Anka-Vidya (Jyotish), Sugam Jyotish Praveshika 
y 
Bhavartha Bodhini Phala-Deepika, Triphala (Jyotish) Jatakadesh-Marg 
a 
Chandrika, Vyapar Ratna (Part 11), 1000 Aphorisms on Love and Marriag 
PREFACE 
There are in the market many books on Hindu astrology. I 
have seen some of them. Still I have been prompted to place a 
new one before the readers. That is because I feel I have been 
able to present some new points of view which the readers would 
not find in other works. 
I do not claim to be original in the sense that I have evolved 
any new theories. It is difficult to do so in a subject which has 
been successfully dealt with by a host of savants and scholars 
through the ages. I have been perusing Sanskrit works on astrology 
since 1927 and have been practising astrology. I have had 
occasion to go through ten Sanskrit commentaries on the same 
work by eniment scholars who lived in the preceding centuries. 
I have been charmed by their subtleties in exposition. Besides, 
standard works on Hindu astrology deal with the same topics and 
the number of such works is too large and their perusal is a 
problem, particularly for the lay readers who do not know 
Sanskrit. Even many who know Sanskrit will find it a thorny 
path to follow fully the logic encompassed in difficult diction, 
for erudition does not always go with straight and simple 
expression. I have therefore picked and chosen what I have 
considered best and only presented in cumulative form a few 
drops of old wine in a new bottle. As such I do not claim 
that I have evolved any new theories for I am only presenting 
the quintessence from the works of old masters. 
vi 
While doing so, I have been conscious that I am writing a 
book which is to initiate new readers into this sacred science 
and if I pour into it all the wisdom of ancient seers it would add 
to the learning but become so formidable that new entrants 
will find it too difficult to follow, and it would defeat the very 
purpose of making it a popular text-book for the masses. I am 
fully conscious that I have not dealt with many intricate calcula- 
tions and the readings based on them which can be useful 
for advanced students and scholars, but that would have made the 
book too voluminous and complex. All these matters I reserve 
for subsequent volumes. 
I have observed that a large number of people are fond of 
astrology, but their interest in the subject becomes lukewarm as 
soon as they have to cross the wall of calculations. Only a small 
percentage has the patience and the perseverance to scale the 
wall and enjoy the fruit beyond. So I have kept the calculations 
at the minimum and diffused them in chapters 4, 7 and 12 
so that they do not prove an obstacle at any place and present 
an easy go over. Another feature of calculations is that in ancient 
India time was reckoned in Ghatis and Palas. One day, twenty- 
four hours, was divided into sixty Ghatis and each Ghati was 
sub-divided into sixty Palas. All calculations in Hindu astrology 
are on this basis. But now-a-days time is recorded including the 
birth time, in hours and minutes. Many up-to-date ephemerides 
also furnish time in hours and minutes. So instead of following 
the complicated process of finding the sunrise time, calculating 
the time elapsed since sunrise till birth and calculating the rising 
sign and the ascending degree, I have introduced the modern 
method of ascertaining the ascending degree by the trigono- 
metrical method as given in Raphael's Table of Houses for the 
tropical zodiac or Lahiri's Table of Houses for the sidereal 
zodiac. 
The duration of each ascendant varies with the latitude and 
since the tables referred to above cover most of them, that not 
only makes the calculation simple but more precise also. 
Hindu astrology is sidereal. But in the West most of the 
astrologers base their calculations and inferences on the tropical 
zodiac. An increasing number of people in the West is, however, 
taking interest in the predictions on the sidereal basis and they 
want a text-book on Hindu astrology. To cater to their needs and 
Preface vii 
to enable them to convert a tropical chart into a sidereal one, I 
have all through provided instructions so that the students and 
scholars of the West may take full advantage of this text-book. 
And with this view I have used the nomenclature Sun, Moon, 
Mars etc. instead of Surya, Chandra, Mangal etc. and Aries, 
Taurus, Gemini etc. instead of Mesha, Vrishabha, Mithuna and 
so on. I must add here that Western astrologers use she for Moon 
and Venus but in the Hindu texts the Moon and Venus are 
referred to as he. There is a mythology that the Moon had a 
liaison with Jupiter's wife Tara and thus Tara gave birth to 
Mercury. Whatever be the import of the mythology, in view of the 
above and similar statements I find it difficult to refer to the 
Moon as she. According to Hindu texts Venus has a wife and 
I have in view of all this stuck to the Hindu code of referring 
to the Moon and Venus as he. While sticking mainly to the 
Western terminology I have utilised essential Hindu terminology 
where no single word in English could have conveyed the full 
import of the technical term in Sanskrit. Instead of referring to 
the term by circumlocution of English phraseology which would 
have been ambiguous and created confusion rather than clarifica- 
tion, I have preferred to use the technical Sanskrit terms which 
have been fully explained in the appropriate contexts. 
Those who are beginners will find that in perusing this book 
they can start from the scratch and ascend gradually to the high 
pinnacles of delineations and judgment. Those who are already 
acquainted with the subject will find many new rules and the 
discussions enlightening and throwing back the horizon of 
astrological knowledge. While bearing in mind that a large 
number of readers might be new to the subject, I have at places 
explained the various steps at length or clarified the obscure points 
which may appear unnecessary to those who are already aware 
of the technicalities or the import of particular configurations in 
the birth chart. To them my only apology is that though it would 
have been more convenient for me to skip over the familiar steps 
it would have landed in difficulty those new readers who have 
not the grasp of the subject. Their need has also to be kept in 
mind. 
In regard to the calculations and predictions, fairly good matter 
has been provided. But as in medical sciences, so in astrology, 
one cannot become proficient by the study of theory alone. 
via Preface 
A certain amount of practice is essential. 
I look forward to the prospect of this text-book being received 
with interest and approbation by the reading public. If my hopes 
are fulfilled I shall feel amply rewarded. 
93-Daryaganj, 
Delhi-6 
GOPESH KUMAR OJHA 
CONTENTS 
PREFACE 
CHAPTER 1 The Zodiac 
A general idea of the heavens—the earth's path round the Sun— 
the zodiac defined and explained—latitude of planets—Sun has 
no latitude—intersections of the orbits of Moon and earth—nodes 
of Moon—Rahu and Ketu—the tropical and sidereal zodiacs 
distinguished—constellations—longitudes of constellations—their 
geometrical patterns—constellations in each sidereal sign—declina- 
tion of Sun—equinoxes—precession of equinoxes and nutation- 
conversion of tropical longitudes into sidereal. 1— 12 
CHAPTER 2 The Birth Chart 
Birth chart a sketch of heavens—the rising degree at the hori- 
zon—the ecliptic—obliquity of the ecliptic—time taken by each 
sign to rise—difference in durations of rise due to geographical 
latitude—what is a house—domain of houses—their order—op- 
posite signs. 13 — 18 
CHAPTER 3 Time 
Cycles of time according to ancient Hindu texts—different calen- 
dars—the 60 years cycle—name for each year—the twelve Hindu 
months—tithi (the lunar date) determined on the basis of soli- 
X Contents 
lunar distance—names of lunar dates—half tithi called a karma— 
the names of karanas—their order—the Hindu panchanga (ephe- 
meris)—the yogas or time durations based on longitudes of the 
Sun and Moon—their names and order—Hindu unit of time- 
ghatis and palas—the modern units of time, hours, minutes and 
seconds—modern ephemerides—some inauspicious tithis, Karanas 
and yogas at birth time—some unfavourable constellations for 
Moon to be in, at birth — their effects. 19 — 32 
CHAP TER 4 Sign Rising (Ascendant) 
Duration taken by each sign to rise at a particular geographical 
latitude—table of houses—common errors in calculating the rising 
degree—calculations based on sunrise—how to calculate the 
rising sign—standard time and local mean time—conversion of 
standard time into local mean time—sidereal time—example work- 
ed out for calculating the ascending degree on a particular date, at 
a particular time and place—how to find exact longitudes of 
planets and make the birth chart—different patterns of birth chart, 
in northern, north-western, southern and eastern India—the occiden- 
tal pattern—effects for each of the twelve ascending signs—some 
special effects for particular degrees rising. 33 — 50 
CHAPTER 5 The Signs 
Difference between the tropical and sidereal signs—correlation 
between signs and parts of human body—correspondence of signs 
with houses—effects thereof—the physi al appearance of signs— 
their places, countries, castes, male and female—odd and even— 
watery and waterless—movable, fixed and common signs—their 
directions—blind and lame signs—diurnal and nocturnal—biped, 
quadruped and snails—mineral, vegetable and animal signs—short 
and long—sign rising with head or back—auspicious and inauspi- 
cious degrees occupied by the Moon in signs—the three 
sectors, 51 — 66 
CHAPTER 6 The Planets 
Only nine planets—Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, 
Saturn and nodes of the Moon—Rahu and Ketu dealt with in 
Contents xi 
Hindu astrology—their signs—exaltation and debilitation signs— 
highest degrees of exaltation and deepest degrees of debilitation— 
the Sanskrit terms avaroha, aroha, uchchabhilashi, neechabhilashi 
explained—friendship, neutrality and enmity among planets— 
natural, temporal and resultant relationship—planetary aspects— 
the characteristics and portfolio of planets—ingredients of the 
human body—complexion, some physical characteristics—tempera- 
ment—glance—flavour—humours of the body—aptitudes—colours 
—age—jewels—seasons—places—sex—deities—the elements—di - 
rection—caste—the type of cloth—biped, quadruped etc. rising 
with front part, back portion or both ways—qualities pertaining to 
metal, herb or animal—directional strength—auspicious and in- 
auspicious planets—manner of winning over—geographical regions 
in India—significance of each planet—planets as significators for 
particular houses—the Sanskrit terms papa and papi explained. 
67 — 90 
CHAPTER 7 Houses 
What are houses—various systems of house division—older 
Hindu system—equal house division—example worked out—cusp 
of each house—domain of each house—house lords—placing a 
planet in house—what to judge from each house—house lords 
signifying matters pertaining to houses they are lords of—one and 
the same matter judged from different houses—subtle distinctions 
therein—some difference in southern and northern Indian schools 
of Hindu astrology—parts of human body assigned to each house — 
matters and affairs judged from first, second, third, fourth, fifth, 
sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth houses— 
details based on old Sanskrit texts—reference to these—a summary 
of matters governed by each house. 91 —115 
CHAPTER 8 Planets in Signs 
Correspondence between signs and houses—Sun in twelve signs 
Aries to Pisces—the influence exerted by Moon according to his 
location in a sign—effects of Mars in the various signs of the 
zodiac—location of Mercury in the twelve signs—position of Jupiter 
in each sign—effects of Venus occupying any sign Aries to Pisces— 
an analysis of Saturn's influence on the native according to his 
xi Contents 
position in various signs—effects of Rahu and Ketu analysed 
signwise—detailed delineation of each planet's effects by location 
in a sign of exaltation, debilitation or own sign—particularly 
favourable or unfavourable degrees for each planet occupying a 
particular sign. 116 -- 148 
CHAPTER 9 Planets in Houses 
Sun in twelve houses—first to twelfth—delineation of Moon's 
influence according to his location in one house or the other— 
how Mars affects the birth chart and matters connected with the 
house he occupies—Mercury's location in any of the twelve houses 
and the results thereof—Jupiter in twelve houses first to twelfth 
and the effects produced by him due to occupying a particular 
house—influence of Venus in each of the twelve houses of the birth 
chart—Satums location in a house and the effects arising 
therefrom -Rahu and Ketu's position in any of the twelve houses 
analysed housewise. 149 — 
17 6 
CHARTER 10 General Principles of Judgment 
Malefic tenanting his own house—aspect of a benefic or malefic 
planet in own house conjoined with or aspected by a benefic—a 
retrograde planet—planet in angle—natural and temporal friend- 
ships compared—evil places—occupation of a house by lord of 
an evil house—consideration of karaka (significator) along with 
house lord—effect of good or evil combinations—house hemmed 
in between benefics or malefics—lord of the house similarly placed 
—a combust house lord—placement of karaka and various consi- 
derations to determine his effects—evaluation of aspect of a planet 
according to his strength—owner of two houses one good and the 
other evil—lord of two houses occupying one of his houses—lord of 
ascendant—some astrological terms in Sanskrit explained 
apachaya-asta (combust)—dosha—dusthana—karaka—maraka-ra- 
jayoga sambandha, upachaya, yoga, yogakaraka. 177 — 192 
CHAPTER 11 Yogas—Combinations of Planets 
Importance of yogas-18 yogas based on ascendant as a factor- 
9 yogas connected with the lord of the ascendants-6 yogas per- 
Contents xiii 
taining to the Sim-20 yogas with Moon as one of the factors-6 
yogas connected with births during day or night and concomitant 
factors-8 yogas based on sign positions of planets-24 yogas 
based on placement of planets in their own signs or their signs of 
exaltation-26 yogas formed in birth charts according to positions 
of planets in houses-66 yogas according to mutual exchange of 
house lords-24 yogas according to the houses being tenanted by 
benefics or malefics and their lords occupying good or evil houses 
—9 yogas connected with lords of houses-2 yogas based on 
directional strength-5 yogas connected with placement of planets 
in their signs of debilitation-1 yoga based on retrogression- 
kendra—trikona yogas fully discussed and guide lines for evalua- 
tion of their effects. 193 — 219 
CHAPTER 12 Judgment of the Twelve Houses 
General principles—comparative assessment of one matter from 
several connected houses—^instructions for judging yogas—conjunc- 
tions—counting of houses—first house—second-third-fourth-fifth- 
sixth-seventh-eighth-ninth-tenth-eleventh and the twelfth house— 
detailed guide lines for judging each house and some special factors 
for each house augmenting the good effects or enhancing the evil 
effects pertaining to health, wealth, eyes, brothers and sisters, 
valour, mother, land, immovable property, conveyance—intelli- 
gence, education, stomach, sons, enemies, illness, wife or husband — 
partnership legacy duration of life, longevity, death, legacy, 
religion, general prosperity and good fortune—power—position- 
income — expenditure, losses etc. 220 — 249 
CHAPTER 13 Calculation of Mahadashas and Antardashas 
Their importance in a birth chart, the major periods of each 
planet—their order—Moon's position in the constellation the basis 
for mahadasha—ready reckoner table to find the balance of ma- 
hadasha at birth—proportionate parts for mahadasha according to 
one or more minutes of arc of Moon—example how to erect table 
of mahadasha—the duration of each antardasha in each maha- 
dasha—their order—to find the balance of antardasha in a maha- 
dasha at birth—example—how to erect tables of antardashas in 
mahadashas. 250 — 259 
xiv Contents 
CHAPTER 14 Mahadashas—Major Periods of Planets and 
Judgment 
How to evaluate their effects—good or evil—four schools of 
Hindu astrology—what effects is the mahadasha likely to show— 
theory of karakatwa or natural significance of the planet- 
illustration—effects of Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, 
Saturn, Rahu and Ketu in respect of matters and affairs they are 
significators for, according as they are strong and well placed or 
weak and afflicted—effects of lords of houses—first, second, 
third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh 
and twelfth according as they are beneficially placed and 
powerful or' in evil places and weak—Parashari system— 
favourable and unfavourable mahadashas of various planets for 
each ascendantmahadashas of lords of trines, angles, third, sixth 
and eleventh—of the eighth lord-of lords of second and twelfth— 
mahadashas causing serious illness or causing death—favourable 
mahadashas for wealth and prosperity, for power and prestige. 
Mahadashas of Rahu and Ketu—favourable and unfavourable 
mahadashas for each ascendant Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, 
Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and 
Pisces—other factors for evaluating the effects of each 
mahadasha. Planets in signs of exaltation, own sign, signs of great 
friend, friend, neutral, enemy, great enemy or in debilitated sign— 
planets which have crossed highest, exaltation or deepest 
debilitation points—combust or retrograde planet—conjunction 
with a benefic or malefic planet —planets in signs rising with their 
hind or front parts, first-timing of mahadasha effects according to 
the degree occupied by a planet in the radix—other 
considerations—transit of the planet during his mahadasha— 
why a mahadasha is at times favourable for certain matters and 
unfavourable for others—a general discussion. 
260 — 293 
CHAPTER 15 Antardashas—Minor Periods 
General features—balancing of mahadasha and antardasha—if 
both are good or both evil or one good and the other evil—the 
mutual position of the two lords- and their mutual relationship- 
antardasha in evil mahadashas—periods of serious illness and 
likely death—auspicious and inauspicious antardashas according 
Contents xv 
to Parashari system—likely effects of evil antardashas— 
antardashas of lords of trine and angle—likely periods when the full 
effect of antardasha may be felt—antardasha in own 
mahadasha—Saturn in Venus and Venus in Saturn—antardashas 
in yogakaraka's mahadasha—antardashas of yogakaraka— 
inferences based on antardasha lord owning houses as counted 
from the mahadasha lord and an antardasha lord occupying a 
house as counted from the mahadasha lord—illustrations—sub- 
periods in antardashashow to calculate prayantars (sub-periods) 
importance and necessity of calculating sub-periods in some 
cases—particular timings for each planet when he may evince 
masked effect. 294 — 305 
chapter 16 Transits 
Transit defined—importance of Moon—transits computed from 
the Moon sign—appraising transits for persons whose birth data 
not known—rule to allot Moon sign according to the first syllable 
of name—table of syllables and corresponding Moon signs—tran- 
sits of the Sun in several houses counted from the Moon—sign-tran- 
sits of Moon from his radical position—transits of Mars, Mer- 
cury, Jupiter—some special features—transits of Venus and Saturn — 
some special features—transits of Rahu and Ketu—effects of 
transits of all the nine planets housewise—planetary positions 
which obstruct the effects of good or evil transits—twenty factors 
which modify transit influences. 306 — 320 
appendix Precession of Equinox and Nutation from 1880 
to 1972 on the 1st January of each year 221  323 
GLOSSARY OF ASTROLOGICAL TERMS 324 — 327 
INDEX TO SANSKRIT TERMS 329 — 334 
INDEX 335 —347 
CHAPTER 1 
THE ZODIAC 
hindu Astrology is sidereal. The zodiac- is divided into twelve 
sectors on the basis of certain fixed stars. It is true that even the 
fixed stars show some motion, but this being very, very slow, 
infinitesimal, they are for all practical purposes treated as fixed 
stars. 
There are Millions, rather trillions of stars in the sky. It is not 
possible to count or catalogue all of them. In astrology we are 
however concerned only with the stars which lie in the zodiacal 
belt. What is the zodiac? It is the belt comprising the apparent 
path of the Sun. The Sun completes one full revolution in one 
year. The path through which he* appears to travel is called the 
ecliptic. Why did we say 'through which the Sun appears to 
travel'? Why did we not say 'through which the Sun travels'? 
Because, the Sun does not travel, he only appears to travel. In 
fact, it is the Earth which travels round the Sun and pursues a 
particular path — the same path, year after year, century after 
century. This path of the Earth is called the ecliptic. We, the 
inhabitants of the Earth move with it round the Sun and although 
it is the Earth which moves, it appears to us that the Sun is 
moving. 
The ecliptic (the Earth's path) is not circular in shape. It is 
elliptical or egg-shaped. 
* In Hindu astrology all planets, the two luminaries, the five planets and 
the nodes of the Moon, are referred to as 'he'. 
A.-I 
What is the zodiac? This is a belt of the heavens limited by lines 
of about 8 degrees from the ecliptic on each side. While the Sun's 
path is along the ecliptic, why should we then have another belt 
extending to about 8° on either side of the ecliptic and call it the 
zodiac? This is because the Sun moves along the ecliptic, but the 
planets do not follow the exact path of the Sun; their paths are 
sometimes along the ecliptic, sometimes north of the ecliptic 
and at others south of it. However, they do not swerve to the 
north or the south of the ecliptic beyond 8°. The distance 
north of the ecliptic line is called the northern latitude, while the 
distance south of it is known as the southern latitude. When a 
planet has neither a northern latitude nor a southern latitude, 
but is exactly on the ecliptic, it is said to have zero latitude or no 
latitude at all. 
In the Ephemeris, readers will see a column where latitudes of 
planets have been given for each day. But no latitude is ever 
given for the Sun. This is so because it is the real motion 
of the Earth which is given as the motion of the Sun. As 
explained earlier, it is the Earth which moves. But as the Earth 
moves, according to the variation in the angle of the Earth 
or the observers' place, the Sun appears to be in a different direc- 
tion. So, since the Earth confines itself to the ecliptic, the Sun also 
appears on the ecliptic. As the Earth does not move north or 
south of the ecliptic, the Sun also does not appear to move 
north or south of the ecliptic. The Sun, therefore, does not ever 
have any latitude, northern or southern. In other words the Sun 
always has zero latitude. 
In astronomy distances are measured in degrees. A circle has 
360 degrees. One degree is divided into parts, and each part is 
called a minute. A minute is further sub-divided into 60 parts, 
and each sub-division is called a second. This is the division in 
space. The directions are as usual east, west, north and south. 
The Sun has no latitude as said above. But what about the 
other planets—the Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and 
Saturn? We have not included Herschel, Neptune or Pluto in the 
above list of planets because they were discovered only lately and 
there is no mention of them in ancient Hindu astrology. But Hindu 
astrology is a complete system in itself and provides detailed guide 
lines for future predictions. The rules of Hindu predictive astrology 
are easier to learn and have been found to be more precise in 
application and capable of yielding more accurate results than 
3 
other methods of prediction. 
The latitude of a planet is important in Hindu astronomy. But 
in Hindu astrology it has little significance. The point, however, 
is important in as much as no planet has more than 8° of northern 
or southern latitude. So the path of the planets is confined along 
the ecliptic within a belt of 8° on either side. All planets traverse 
the path within the zodiac. 
While explaining the zodiac and the northern or the southern 
latitudes of planets, it would be appropriate to add that when the 
Moon in his orbit round the Earth travels to the northern latitude. 
Cie point where it cuts the ecliptic is deemed a sensitive point. 
This is called the northern node of the Moon. The point where 
the Moon in his orbit round the earth cuts the ecliptic in his 
passage to the south of the ecliptic is also a very sensitive point 
and is called the southern node of the Moon. These two points, 
the northern and the southern nodes of the Moon, are always 180° 
apart. 
These two points are, however, not fixed or stationary in the 
sense that if the Moon crossed over to the north of the ecliptic 
at a particular point today, he would cross over the same place 
the next month or in any subsequent month. Actually, this point 
recedes, and in about one year it recedes by about 18.84°, with 
the result that by its backward motion in the zodiac, it comes to 
the same point in about nineteen years. 
In Hindu astrology, great importance is attached to these two 
points and they are called Rahu and Ketu. The northern node of 
the Moon is called Rahu. and the southern, Ketu. 
In Western astrology the northern node is referred to as Caput 
Draconis and the southern one as Cauda Draconis. In predictive 
astrology, some Western astrologers do take these into considera- 
tion, but most ignore them. The position of Rahu or the northern 
node is given in the Ephemeris. The southern node's longitude is 
not given for the simple reason that Rahu and Ketu are always 
180° apart. If the longitude of one is known, that of the other can 
always be calculated. 
These two, Rahu and Ketu, are not planets in the sense of Mars, 
Mercury, Jupiter, etc. Rahu and Ketu have no mass, no weight, 
no light, no body. They are simply two sensitive points. In Hindu 
astrology, the Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, 
Rahu and Ketu are called Grahas. The literal meaning of Graha is 
4 
seizing, grasping, laying hold on, gripping, etc. A Graha according 
to Hindu conception is an entity having the power to seize, 
grasp, grip, lay hold of etc. And since the planets have that power 
they are called Grahas. In English the Sun and Moon are called 
the luminaries, while Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, etc., are called 
planets. But for the sake of convenience all these, including the 
Sun and Moon, are commonly referred to as planets. So in the 
context of Hindu astrology we may describe all the nine Grahas 
as planets, though Rahu and Ketu have, as already explained, 
no body. 
THE ZODIAC 
While explaining the term ecliptic we passed on to latitude and in 
that connection explained what the nodes of the Moon were. Our 
principle subject of discussion was, however, the zodiac. What the 
zodiac is has been described, but in order to fully understand this 
we have to know the difference between the Tropical zodiac and 
the Sidereal zodiac. The same belt of the heaven is referred to by 
some as the Tropical zodiac and by others as the Sidereal zodiac. 
11 lETROnCAI VND II lESIDEId AL ZODIAC 
If there be a straight line, every one would begin at one end and 
terminate at the other, but if a figure were circular or elliptical a 
question would naturally arise as to the commencing point—where 
the figure begins. There are no pillars or poles in the zodiac. How 
is one to locate or identify a particular point? From times im- 
memorial Hindu astronomers have identified the particular regions 
in the zodiac by means of fixed constellations. The names of the 
constellations are given below : 
1. Ashwini Arietis 
2. Bharani 41 Arietis 
3. Krittika Alcyone 2 
4. Rohini Aldebaran 3 
5. Mrigashira Orionis 
6. Ardra Betelguese 7 
7._ Punarvasu Pollux 11 
8. Pushya Caned 
9. Ashlesha e-Hydrae 
10. Magha Regulus 14 
1.1. Poorva- Leonis 
phalguni 
12. Uttara- Denebola 15 
phalguni 
13. Hasta Spica 16 
14. Chitra Corvi 
5 
15. Swati Arcturus 17 
16. Vishakha a Libra 
17. Anuradha Scorpii 
18. Jyeshtha Antares 18 
19. Moola Scorpii 
20. Poorva- Sagittari 
shadha 
21. Uttara- Sagittari 
shadha 
22. Shravana Altair 20 
23. Dhanishtha Delphini 
24. Shatabh Aquarii 
isha 
25. Poorva- Markeb 24 
bhadra 
26. Uttara- Pegasi 
bhadra 
27. Revati Piscium 
In older Hindu astrology there are references to one more con- 
stellation, Abhijit in between Uttarashadha and Shravana, but in 
later Hindu, works it was dropped and now only these twenty-seven 
constellations are taken as identifying marks round the zodiac. 
These constellations were also catalogued by Ptolemy and other 
Western astronomers and the Greek names for these have been 
given in the above list. During the course of this book, we shall 
however refer to them by their Sanskrit names. Very detailed desc 
riptions of these constellations have been given in works on 
Hindu astrology. Some are deemed auspicious for election purposes, 
i.e., for choosing or selecting a suitable time for commencing an 
important undertaking, while others are not. Some constellations 
are specially marked as good for commencing a journey, others for 
performance of a wedding, and so on. These constellations have 
also been labelled as benefic and malefic. When the Moon is in 
benefic constellations, benefic undertakings should be commenced; 
while for evil deeds, for example, if the object is to set fire, to 
give poison, to wage a war or to kill or damage an enemy, the 
Moon in a malefic constellation is more conducive to success! 
Some have been described as face downwards, others as facing 
upwards, yet others as having a gaze in a slanting direction. All 
work such as digging a well is good when the Moon is in a con- 
stellation facing downwards, while in all undertakings such as 
building a house in which we proceed upwards, the Moon in a 
constellation facing upwards would be more helpful. All this is the 
field of electional astrology, but we have mentioned this in the 
present context to show that in Hindu astrology these constella- 
tions form the bases. 
We give below the identifying marks or characteristics of the 
constellations to locate them in the sky. We have also given their 
6 
longitudes in the Sidereal zodiac-as on 1st January 1969. 
Constellation Longitude ^ Number of 
Stars 
1. Ashwini 0-10- 6-47 Face of a horse 3 
2. Bharani 0-24-20-48 Yoni 3 
3. Krittika 1- 6. 8- 8 Curved knife 6 
4. Rohini 1-15-55-54 Cart • 5 
5. Mrigashira 1-29-50-59 Face of a deer 3 
6. Ardra 2-4-53-51 Jewel 1 
7. Punarvasu 2-29-21-49 House 4 
8. Pushya 3-14-51-53 Arrow 3 
9. Ashlesha 3-18-29-24 Circular 5 
10. Magha 4-5-58-27 House 5 
11. Poorvaphalguni 4-17-27-25 Manchaka 2 
12. Uttaraphalguni 4-27-45-48. Small cot 2 
13. Hasta 5-19-35-48 Hand 5 
14. Chitra 5-29-59-5 Pearl 1 
15. Swati 6-0-22-37 Coral 1 
16. Vishakha 6-21-13-34 Torana 4 
17. Anuradha 7-8-42-52 Vali 4 
18. Jyeshtha 7-15-54-19 Like a circular earring 4 
19. Moola 8- 0-43-43 Tail of a lion 3 
20. Poorvashadha 8-10-43-24 Tusk of an elephant 11 
21. Uttarashadha 8-18-31-41 Manchaka 2 
22. Shravana 9- 7-54-52 Aeroplane 3 
23. Dhanishtha 9-22-29- 7 Mridanga 4 
24. Shatabhisha 10-17-43-7 Elliptic 100 
25. Poorvabhadra 10-29-37-47 Manchaka 2 
26. Uttarabhadra 11-15.18-0 Twins 2 
27. Revati 11-26-1-10 Mardala 32 
Certain Sanskrit words used under the column 'shape' need ex- 
planation. Yoni means the shape of the sexual organ of a woman; 
Manchaka is a raised seat dais resting on columns; Torana 
means an arched doorway; Vali means a fold or wrinkle, i.e. having 
curls; Mridanga is an oblong leather bag which is filled with air 
and played upon like a musical instrument; Mardala is a kind 
of drum. 
The information provided in reference to the shape or figure, 
7 
i.e., the various stars constituting the constellation or the number 
of stars therein are not important for predictive purposes. But the 
particulars have been furnished to indicate how these constella- 
tions are identified in the sky. The longitudes of the constellations 
relate to the principal star where there are more than one star in 
the constellation, for naturally the various stars in the constella- 
tion will have different longitudes. But for purposes of predictive 
astrology each constellation is treated as having a jurisdiction of 
13° 20' of longitude. This point is important, as we shall have 
to refer to this matter in subsequent chapters. How do we 
arrive at the figure of 13° 20'? This is done by the simple pro- 
cess of dividing 360° by 27. A circle, whether it be an exact circle 
or an elliptic, has 360° as computed from the centre of it. And 
the number of constellations is twenty-seven. So by the simple 
rule of division we get 13°. 20' as the share of each constellation. 
Hindu astrology is primarily an astrology based on constella- 
tions. The zodiac is covered by twenty-seven constellations named 
above. Not that there are only these twenty-seven constellations 
alone in the zodiac, there are many more. But to make a particular 
position or location in the zodiac these twenty-seven have been 
treated as permanent pillars or posts. Without any such aid it 
would become impossible to describe the zodiac in regard to a 
particular point 
The jurisdiction of each constellation is as described below : 
in signs, degrees & in signs, degrees & 
minutes minutes 
D.M. D.M. S.D.M. S.D.M. 
1. Ashwini 0-0 to 13-20 0- 0- 0 to 0-13-20 
2. Bharani 13-20 to 26-40 0-13-20 to 0-26-40 
3. Krittika 26-40 to 40-0 0-26-40 to 1-10-0 
4. Rohini 40-0 to 53-20 1-10-0 to 1-23-20 
5. Mrigashira 53-20 to 66-40 1-23-20 to 2- 6-40 
6. Ardra 66-40 to 80-0 2-6-40 to 2-20-0 
7. Punarvasu 80-0 to 93-20 2-20- 0 to 3- 3-20 
8. Pushya 93-20 to 106-40 3-3-20 to 3-16-40 
9. Ashlesha 106-40 to 120-0 3-16-40 to 4-0-0 
10. Magha 120- 0 to 133-20 4- 0- 0 to 4-13-20 
11. Poorvaphalguni 133-20 to 146-40 4-13-20 to 4-26-40 
12. Uttaraphalguni 146-40 to 160- 0 4-26-40 to 5-10- 0 
8 
13. Hasta 
114. Chitra 
15. Swati 
16. Vishakha 
17. Anuradha 
18. Jyestha 
19. Moola 
20. Poorvashadha 
21. Uttarashadha 
22. Shravana 
23. Dhanishtha 
24. Shatabhisha 
25. Poorvabhadra 
26. Uttarabhadra 
27. Revati 
160-0 to 173-20 
173-20 to 186-40 
186-40 to 200-0 
200-0 to 213-20 
213-20 to 226-40 
226-40 to 240-0 
240-0 to 253-20 
253-20 to 266-40 
266-40 to 280-0 
280-0 to 293-20 
293-20 to 306-40 
306-40 to 320-0 
320-0 to 333-20 
333-20 to 346-40 
346-40 to 360-00 
5-10- 0 to 5-23-20 
5-23-20 to 6- 6-40 
6- 6-40 to 6-20- 0 
6-20- 0 to 7- 3-20 
7- 3-20 to 7-16-40 
7-16-40 to 8- 0- 0 
8-0-0 to 8-13-20 
8-13-20 to 8-26-40 
8-26-40 to 9-10-0 
9-10- 0 to 9-23-20 
9-23-20 to 10- 6-40 
10- 6-40 to 10-20- 0 
10-20- 0 to 11- 3-20 
11- 3-20 to 11-16-40 
11-16-40 to 12- 0- 0 
If we divide the number 27 by 12, the quotient is two and a 
quarter. Twenty-seven is the number of constellations and 
twelve is the number of the signs. Thus the jurisdiction of a sign is 
constituted by two and a quarter constellations. The names of 
the twelve signs are as follows : 
1. Mesha Aries 7. Tula Libra 
2. Vrishabha Taurus 8. Vrischika Scorpio 
3. Mithuna Gemini 9. Dhanu Sagittarius 
4. Karka Cancer 10. Makara Capricorn 
5. Sinha Leo 11. Kumbha Aquarius 
6. Kanya Virgo 12. Meena Pisces 
Along with the Sanskrit names we have also given their English 
names. There are twelve signs covering 30° each and thus covering 
12x 30 degrees of the zodiac. 
We have already stated that each sign covers two and a quarter 
constellations. Thus each sign covers the constellations or part 
thereof as shown below : 
1. Mesha Aries Ashwini, Bharani and one quar- 
ter of Krittika. 
2. Yrishabha Taurus The remaining three quarters of 
Krittika, Rohini and the first 
half of Mrigashira. 
9 
3. Mithuna Gemini The remaining two quarters of 
Mr igashira, Ardra and three 
quarters of Punarvasu. 
4. Karka Cancer The last quarter of Punarvasu, 
Pushya and Ashlesha. 
5. Sinha Leo Magha, Poorvaphalguni and one 
quarter of Uttaraphalguni. 
6. Kanya Virgo Three quarters of Uttaraphalguni, 
Hasta and the first half of 
Chitra. 
7. Tula Libra The remaining two quarters of 
Chitra, Swati and three quarters 
of Vishakha. 
8. Vrischika Scorpio Hpihi 
Anuradha and Jyeshtha. 
9. Dhanu Sagittarius Moola, Poorvashadha and one 
quarter of Uttarashadha. 
10. Makara Capricorn The remaining three quarters of 
Uttarashadha, Shravana and first 
half of Dhanishtha. 
11. Kumbha Aquarius Last two quarters of Dhanishtha 
Shatabhisha and three quarters 
of Poorvabhadra. 
12. Meena Pisces The last quarter of Poorvabha- 
dra, Uttarabhadra and Revati. 
The jurisdiction of each constellation in terms of degrees and 
minutes and also in terms of signs, degrees and minutes has 
already been given in tabular form. Below is a Table showing the 
jurisdiction of each sign in terms of degrees. Hereafter the English 
names for signs—Aries, Taurus, etc., will be used as that will be 
more convenient for the readers. The Sanskrit equivalents have 
already been given above to familiarise the readers with the Hindu 
nomenclature. 
Signs 
1. Aries 
2. Taurus 
3. Gemini 
4. Cancer 
Degrees 
0° to 30° 
31° to 60° 
61° to 90° 
91° to 120° 
Signs 
5. Leo 
6. Virgo 
7. Libra 
8. Scorpio 
Degrees 
121° to 150° 
151° to 180° 
181° to 210° 
211° to 240° 
10 
9. Sagittarius 241° to 270° 11. Aquarius 301o.to330o 
10. Capricorn 271° to 300° 12.Pisces 331° to 360° 
We have already seen how the zodiac is divided into constella- 
tions and signs, but the crucial question remains: where to start 
the zero degree from. The simple answer is that the zero degree 
commences from Ashwini the fixed star. From this point to 30° 
is allotted to Aries, the next 30° to Taurus, and so on. 
The word 'sidereal' means pertaining to stars, and the Hindu 
zodiac is the sidereal one, that is, of the constellations of the fixed 
stars. It is also called the stellar zodiac or pertaining to stars. 
Since the stars are fixed this is called the fixed zodiac also. 
The word 'tropic' may be defined as parallel to latitude 23° 27' 
in the north the Tropic of Cancer or in the south the Tropic of 
Capricorn; these are the two corresponding circles on the celestial 
sphere where the Sun appears to turn after reaching greatest de- 
clination. This requires some explanation. 
On or about the 21st March, the Sun rises due east, ascends 
the heavens and sets in the west—the apparent path of the Sun 
is thus above the geographical equator. The next day the Sun 
rises in the east and ascends the heavens to set in the west; but 
its apparent path is not exactly over the equator but slightly to 
the north of the equator. This distance between the equator and 
the path, as measured in degrees, is called the declination. It is 
called the northern declination if the apparent path of the hea- 
venly body is to the north of the equator and southern declina- 
tion if the apparent path is to the south of the equator. It is 
measured in degrees and minutes of arc. 
Now from the 21st March onwards, every day the Sun's path 
becomes increasingly northern till on or about the 21st June, its 
northern declination becomes maximum. It is about 23° 27' nor- 
thern declination on that day. Then the northern declination 
begins to decrease day by day and on or about the 22nd Septem- 
ber, it again rises due east, passes over the equator and sets in the 
west. The next day he rises in the east, ascends the heavens and 
sets in the west; but this passage is not exactly over the equator 
but slightly southwards. This southern declination goes on in- 
creasing till about the 22nd December when the declination is 
23° 27' south. Having reached the maximum southern declination 
the Sun begins to rise and set with less and less southern declina- 
11 
tion till on or about the 21st March the declination becomes zero; 
it is neither to the south nor to the north, but exactly above the 
equator. And the same phenomenon—increasing northern declina- 
tion reaching the northernmost point, then reverting to a passage 
over the equator, proceeding with increasing southern declination, 
reaching the maximum southern declination and reverting to 
passage over the equator—goes on year after year. 
Now the degree of the ecliptic where the Sun in its passage 
has no declination, i.e., where the Sun is on 21st March and 22nd 
September, are called equinoxes and such degrees are called the 
equinoctial degrees. 
The word equinoxes may be defined as two points at which 
the Sun crosses the equator and the day and night are equal. 
The equinoctial line might be described as that circle of celestial 
sphere whose plane is perpendicular to the Earth's axis. 
Had these equinoxes been fixed points, there would have been 
no complication. But these equinoctial points shift backwards. 
They precede at the rate of 50.25 seconds of arc per annum or 
roughly one degree in seventy-two years. The equinoctial points 
seventy-two years ago are not the equinoctial points today. It is 
one degree backwards or we might say that it has preceded by 
one degree. After seventy-two years from now it will further pre- 
cede by one degree. 
There is one more peculiarity of the Earth's motion—it resem- 
bles the oscillation of a spinning top_. The oscillation of the Earth's 
axis makes a wavy motion at the pole of the equator round the 
pole of the ecliptic which is called Nutation. 
Due to the twin phenomena of precession of equinoxes and 
nutation the two equinoctial points are ever preceding. The 
degree in which the Sun is on or about 21st March, when he 
has no declination, is called the spring equinox and the degree 
occupied by him on or about the 22nd September when again 
he has no declination is called the autumnal equinox. Most 
western astronomers commence the zero degree of the zodiac 
from the spring equinox and complete 360° by counting 30° 
for each sign (12x 30=360°) from the point. Due to the 
precession of the equinox, the point also precedes year 
after year. This commencement from the equinoctial 
point describes the tropical zodiac. When the Sun's 
passage reaches the sign of Cancer, the corresponding line 
below the Sun's passage on Earth is called the Tropic of 
12 
Cancer. Similarly, when the Sun reaches the sign of Capricorn, 
the corresponding line below the passage of the Sun on Earth is 
known as the Tropic of Capricon. This is called the moving zodiac 
because the commencing degree or the equinoctial points con- 
stantly move by shifting backwards. 
Once the two zodiacs, the sidereal and the tropical, were iden- 
tical when the spring equinoctial point was at zero degree Ash- 
wini, i.e., the beginning of the sidereal zodiac. But through the ages, 
by constant shifting back of the spring equinoctial point, there is 
now a distance of about 23° between the commencing points of 
the two zodiacs. This distance is called the precession of the 
equinox and nutation. 
Since the constellation Ashwini has more than one .star, Hindu 
astrologers also are not all unanimous in regard to the present 
value of the precession of the equinox and nutation, say, on 1st 
January 1969. But the majority of eminent astrologers in India 
approve of the value as given in Lahiri's Ephemeris. According to 
this Indian ephemeris the precession of equinox and nutation on 
1st January 1969 was 23° 25' 25". The precession of equinox 
and nutation for the first of January of each year has been given 
in an appendix at the end of the book. 
The attention of readers is again invited to the very important 
fact that Hindu Astrology is based upon the sidereal or the fixed 
zodiac. All signs are as in the fixed zodiac and the longitudes of 
planets also refer to their location in the fixed zodiac. 
Readers should therefore verify that the birth chart before 
them is in the sidereal zodiac. If the cusp d the first and the 
tenth houses and the longitudes of planets refer to the tropical 
zodiac and have been taken from Raphael's or any other Western 
Ephemeris, the value of the precession of the equinox and nuta- 
tion on the date of birth must be ascertained from the Appendix 
and deducted from the tropical longitudes, to convert them into 
sidereal ones. In a subsequent chapter we shall indicate how to 
calculate the rising degree, minute and second at a particular hour 
at any place on the earth. 
CHAPTER 
THE BIRTH CHART 
THE BIRTH chart is a sketch of the heavens at the time of birth 
as viewed from the place of birth. Thus three elements are requir- 
ed to make the birth chart: (i) the date of birth, (ii) the time of 
birth, and (iii) the longitude and latitude of the place of birth. The 
birth place is important because the positions of the rising sign 
and mid-heaven are taken as viewed from the place of birth. The 
longitudes of the planets entered in the chart are geocentric, i.e., 
as if viewed from the centre of the earth. Thus the geocentric 
degree, minute and second in a particular sign will be the same 
at a particular time whether the birth is in India or America or 
Australia or any other place. But at a time when it is noon in 
India it will be mid-night in America, and when the Sun is in the 
mid-heaven in India it will be at the nadir in America. Thus the 
house position of the Sun will differ. 
The point of the ecliptic touching or cutting the eastern horizon 
is called the ascendant. It is called the ascendant because it ascends 
or goes up. This needs explaining. Suppose the birth is at sunrise 
when the Sun is rising on the Eastern horizon; the degree of the 
ecliptic rising will be the same as the longitude occupied by the 
Sun. After a couple of hours the Sun will be higher up in the 
east and the degree which was rising in the east at the time will 
also go up. After another two hours the Sun and degree rising, 
both being identical, will further go up. After another hour it will 
go up further still. We cannot see or identify the degree rising 
14 
at the time of birth with the naked eye. But we can see the Sun, 
and since the degree rising and the Sun at sunrise have identical 
locality, when we see the Sun rising we infer that the degree which 
was at birth touching the eastern horizon is also rising. Now this 
phenomenon of rising is called ascending and the degree rising 
on the eastern horizon at the time of birth is called the ascendant. 
Correctly speaking, the ascending degree, minute, and second is 
the point of the ascendant; but in common parlance if the degree 
falls in the sign Aries, we call Aries as the ascendant; if it falls 
in Taurus, we deem Taurus as the ascendant, and so on. 
In Sanskrit the ascendant is called the Lagnam. The word 
Lagnam means 'attached to.' Attached to what? To the eastern 
horizon. 
Since the Earth by its revolving motion round its axis com- 
pletes one revolution in twenty-four hours, all the signs rise in 
succession, and the rising of the twelve signs is completed in 
twenty-four hours. 
Because the Earth is inclined in relation to the plane of the ecliptic 
and since the path of the Earth is also elliptic, the durations 
of the signs rising, i.e., the durations of the signs, at the eastern 
horizon, differ. This difference is also caused by the latitude of the 
place of birth. To explain this further : If we draw an ellipse on 
paper and draw twelve lines from the centre to the circumference, 
each making an angle of 30° with the centre, although the degrees 
of each sector at the centre will be 30° the arcs on the elliptical 
circumference made by these radial Wes will be of unequal 
lengths. 
At a particular given place the following pairs of signs take 
equal time to rise : 
Aries and Pisces, 
Taurus and Aquarius, 
Gemini and Capricorn, 
Cancer and Sagittarius, 
Leo and Scorpio, 
Virgo and Libra. 
From the equator as we proceed to the north, the ascending 
time of Aries, Taurus and Gemini as also of Pisces, Aquarius and 
Capricorn goes on decreasing, and the ascending time of Cancer, 
15 
Leo and Virgo, as also of Sagittarius, Scorpio and Libra goes on 
increasing. In southern latitudes it is the reverse. 
We shall explain subsequently to calculate the ascending degree. 
But before we do so, it is necessary to explain what is meant by 
house division. The eastern horizon is denoted in the birth chart 
as we draw it on paper, representing a rough sketch of the 
heavens, by the ascendant; the western horizon by the descendant; 
the mid-heaven by the tenth house, and the nadir by the fourth 
house. If a person is born at sunrise, the Sun is in the east. So 
the Sun will be in the ascendant. If a person is born at sunset, 
the Sun will be in the west. So the Sun will be in the descendant 
or the seventh house. Similarly, if a person is born at noon his 
Sun will be in mid-heaven and therefore in the tenth house. Cor- 
respondingly, if the birth is at midnight the Sun will be exactly 
below, i.e., in the fourth house. 
The eastern horizon is to the east, the western is to the west. 
The mid-heaven in the south and the nadir in the north. The sign 
rising in the east is the first house; just below the eastern horizon 
is the second house; then further below it in the sky below the 
Earth is the third house; then further below is the fourth, then 
the fifth, then the sixth and at the western horizon the seventh. 
From the western horizon we go up and that is the eighth house; 
then still further up will be the ninth, and in mid-heaven will be 
the tenth house. As we proceed from the mid-heaven towards the 
east there will be the eleventh house and then just above the 
horizon will be the twelfth house. In other words, we count the 
signs or the houses from the eastern horizon; we have to proceed 
from the eastern horizon via below the earth come to the western 
horizon, then go up to mid-heaven and complete the circle by 
coming to the eastern horizon. Let us further clarify this. 
Suppose the sign rising on the eastern horizon is Aries. We 
are for the time being not paying attention to the degree in Aries 
which like all others, has 30°, but taking the sign Aries as a 
whole. Then Taurus will be below the Earth, with Gemini under 
it, then Cancer in the sky below the Earth, with Leo also under 
the Earth and with Virgo also under the Earth. At the western 
horizon there will be Libra. We go higher up and there will be 
Scorpio. Further higher up will be Sagittarius and at the mid- 
heaven point will be Capricorn. As we proceed from mid-heaven 
towards the eastern horizon, there will be found Aquarius and 
16 
then Pisces. This is generally the case near the equator. But in 
very high latitudes, due to the' 'C from the mid-heaven to the 
eastern horizon being very unequal to the arc from the eastern 
horizon to the nadir, there is slight Variation in the sign at mid- 
heaven., But the order of the sign Aries, Taurus, Gemini, etc, 
or of the fjrst house, second house and so on never varies. 
What is intended to Convey is that when we commence from 
the point rising at the eastern horizon or the ascending degree, 
we travel east, north, west, south and east again, i.e., via the 
heavens below the Earth and not the other way round. 
What's a House? 
In the above discussion we have used the word 'house.' Readers 
well acquainted with astrology will know what the word 'house' 
actually means in the astrological context. In fact to such readers 
as are well acquainted with astrological terminology, the entire 
first chapter and much of this and subsequent chapters will appear 
to be covering the ground they are well familiar with. But since 
interest in Hindu astrology is increasing and a large number of 
readers will be treading untrodden ground, it is necessary to ex- 
plain each link and each technical word, for if a new reader is not 
acquainted with the basic terminology or misses a link, he will 
not be able to follow the subsequent steps. Those who are already 
familiar with the technical words of astrology or know how to 
cast a birth chart can conveniently skip over the following pages. 
According to older Hindu texts, the words signs and houses 
fall on each other, but the count of the signs is always made 
from Aries which is the first sign. If we say a planet is in the 
first sign, it means that he is in Aries. If we say, it is in the fifth 
sign, it will be in Leo. If we say, it is in the twelfth sign, it will 
be in Pisces because Pisces is the last and the twelfth sign. We 
must remember that when referring to a sign we always count 
Aries as the first and then proceed in the regular order of the signs. 
But a house begins from the ascendant. We must first know 
which is the sign ascending at the particular moment at a particu- 
lar place. The mathematical procedure for finding this will be 
described in subsequent pages. The Earth is globular. It is like a 
globe with the sky all around. There is no part of the sky which 
is not to the east of any locality of the Earth. We can explain 
17 
this further by giving a practical example. The Sun always ap- 
pears to be somewhere on the ecliptic. In fact, he is not on the 
ecliptic; it is the Earth which is on the ecliptic and as viewed 
from the Earth, the Sun appears to be in line with some place on 
the ecliptic. But for practical purpose, we may say that the Sun 
is somewhere in the zodiac. Now this Sun at any time appears in 
the east, in some part or the other of the Earth. So we may state 
that as the zodiac is a circular 'ring in the skies, though in fact it 
is elliptic, going all round, some part of the ring, i.e., the zodiac 
is on the eastern horizon somewhere. 
Now suppose that at a particular time the sign Leo is rising at 
the eastern horizon. Then Leo will constitute the first house, 
Virgo the second house, Libra the third house, Scorpio the fourth 
house, Sagittarius the fifth house, Capricorn the sixth house, 
Aquarius the seventh house, Pisces the eighth house, Aries the 
ninth house, Taurus the tenth house, Gemini the eleventh house 
and Cancer the twelfth house. Now suppose that the Sun is in 
Aquarius. So we say the Sun is in the seventh house or setting in 
the western horizon. 
If suppose Scorpio was rising at New Delhi. Then Scorpio will 
be the first house, Sagittarius the second house. Capricorn the 
third house and so on; and the Sun being in Aquarius he will 
be in the fourth house. 
Delhi's longitude is 11° 13' East and 28° 39' North. Now it 
is elementary geography that when the Sun is setting at Delhi, 
it is rising at a place having the longitude 11° 13' West and 
28° 39' North. The Sun is in Aquarius. So the sign Aquarius is 
rising there and constitutes the first house, Pisces the second house, 
Aries the third house, Taurus the fourth house, Gemini the fifth 
house, Cancer the sixth house, Leo the seventh house, Virgo the 
eighth house, Libra the ninth house, Scorpio the tenth house, Sagit- 
tarius the eleventh house, and Capricorn the twelfth house. Now 
since the Sun is in Aquarius we say the Sun is in the first house. 
And what happens when Scorpio rises at Delhi having 11° 13' 
East longitude. At the corresponding place having 11° 13' West 
longitude and having the same latitude as Delhi, i.e., 28° 39' 
North, the opposite sign Taurus rises; so Taurus will be the first 
house, Gemini the second house, and so on, Aquarius being the 
tenth house. Since the Sun is in Aquarius, the Sun will be in the 
tenth house. 
A.-2 
18 
The following- signs being in opposition at 180°, to each other 
are called opposition signs: 
Aries is in opposition to Libra and Libra to Aries 
Taurus is in opposition to Scorpio and Scorpio to Taurus 
Gemini is in opposition to Sagittarius and Sagittarius to Gemini 
Cancer is in opposition to Capricorn and Capricorn to Cancer 
Leo is in opposition to Aquarius and Aquarius to Leo 
Virgo is in opposition to Pisces and Pisces to Virgo 
We may further clarify this point by citing the example of a 
cycle wheel. Suppose the wheel has twelve spokes at 30° each. 
The circumference of the wheel is thus divided into twelve sectors. 
We shall call them Aries, Taurus, etc. Now rotate the wheel. 
Different sections of the circumference will appear to the east of 
the centre of the wheel. Sometimes Aries will be to the east, at 
others Taurus or Gemini, and so on. This is exactly what happens 
in the case of the Earth, with the difference that here the zodiac 
is constant; it does not move: But the Earth turns round, com- 
pletes a full revolution in about twenty-four hours, and as the 
Earth turns round on its axis an inhabitant on Earth at a fixed 
place, say Delhi facing the east will find certain parts of the 
zodiac on the east, and after about twenty-four hours the same 
sign will come to the east, and thus the cycle continues. 
So we must remember that the sign rising to the east at a parti- 
cular time depends upon the time, date, month, year and the 
longitude and latitude of the place. 
The latitude is very important because the duration of a sign 
rising differs from latitude to latitude. 
TIME 
time IS eternal. Its beginning or end cannot be conceived. But 
still to identify a particular moment we have to take recourse to 
some kind of marking. According to Hindu astrology the Earth 
comes into being and is then destroyed, again it comes into being 
and is again destroyed, and thus the cycle goes on. According to 
the conception of the Hindus, one cycle continues for 43,20,000, 
years. This epoch has been divided into four sub-epochs as follows : 
Satayuga 
Tretayuga 
Dwaparayuga 
Kaliyuga 
4,32,000 x4 
4,32,000 x3 
4,32,000 x2 
4,32,000 x 1 
IOIAL 
17,28,000 years 
12,96,000 „ 
8,64,000 „ 
4,32,000 „ 
43,20,000 years 
We are at present in Kaliyuga. On 15th April 1969, Kaliyuga 
year 5070 commenced. 
Other calendar years like the Yudhishthira year, Buddha year, 
also came into use from time to time, but with the passage of 
time they passed on into oblivion. But there are still current 
various calendars for reckoning different kinds of years in different 
parts of India, for example the Bengali san whose 1376th year 
commenced on 14th April 1969, Kollam era in Kerala whose 
1145th year began on 17th August 1969; but the most widely 
20 
current eras at present are the Vikrama Samvata whose 2026th 
year commenced on 19th March 1969 and the Shaka era whose 
1891st year began on 14th April 1969. The Vikrama year is a 
lunar year, while the Shaka year is a solar year. 
There is a sixty year cycle known as Jupiter's cycle. The names 
assigned to the various years in the sixty year cycle are as 
follows: 
1. Prabhava 21. Sarvajit 41. Plavanga 
2. Vibhava 22. Sarvadhari 42. Keelaka 
3. Shukla 23. Virodhi 43. Saumya 
4. Pramoda 24. Vikrita 44. Sadharana 
5. Prajapati 25. Khara 45. Virodhakrit 
6. Angira 26. Nandana 46. Paridhavi 
7. Shrimukha 27. Vijaya 47. Pramathi 
8. Bhava 28. Jay a 48. Ananda 
9. Yuva 29. Manmatha 49. Rakshasa 
10. Dhata 30. Durmukha 50. Anala 
11. Ishwara 31. Hemalamba 51. Pingala 
12. Bahudhanya 32. Vilamba 52. Kalayukta 
13. Pramathi 33. Vikari 53. Siddhartha 
14. Vikrama 34. Sharvari 54. Raudra 
15. Vrisha 35. Playa 55.Durrnati 
16. Chitra bhanu 36. Shubhakrit 56. Dundubhi 
17. Subhanu 37. Shobhana 57. Rudhiras ghatis 
18. Tarana 38. Krodhi 58. Raktaksha 
19. Parthiva 39. Vishwavasu 59. Krodhana 
20. Vyaya 40. Parabhava 60. Kshaya. 
Certain effects on nativities and on mundane affairs have been 
attributed to each of the years, but it would be too academic to 
discuss them here. A broad outline of the conception of time and 
the various eras and epochs have been provided to convey an idea 
of the background of Hindu astrology. The subject we are dealing 
with in this volume is primarily the reading of the birth chart on 
the basis of the planetary positions and we shall revert to this. 
In Hindu nativities worked out in Sanskrit theDurmati 
expressed in terms of Samvata, the Hindu name of the month, 
the lunar date of the month, and the time of birth as4-0atis 
and Palas after sunrise is given. Some astrologers put the shaka 
year also in ad- 
21 
dition to the Samvata year. In northern India the Vikram Samvata 
commences from Chaitra Shukla, but in Gujarat and some western 
and southern parts of India the Vikram Samvata commences after 
seven months on Kartika Shukla. 
The names of the twelve months are : 
1. Chaitra 7. Ashwina 
2. Vaishakha 8. Kartika 
3. Jyeshtha 9. Margashirsha 
4. Ashadha 10. Pausha 
5. Shravana 11. Magha 
6. Bhadra 12. Phalguna. 
These are lunar months. When after the conjunction of the Sun 
and the Moon, the Moon having much faster motion than the 
Sun goes ahead of the Sun, it is called Shukla. The word Shukla 
means white or bright in Sanskrit. The period from now onwards 
for about fifteen days is called Shukla because the Moon having 
crossed the conjunction of the Sun is now proceeding towards the 
opposition of the Sun. If the Moon has one bright digit, today, he 
will have two bright digits tomorrow, and so on until on or about 
the fifteenth day there will be full Moon. This is called the bright 
half of the month or the Shukla Paksha. When the Moon has 
reached the opposition of the Sun, i.e., is exactly at 180° from 
the Sun, the dark half of the month commences. The bright part 
of the Moon's disc starts shedding one digit each day until on or 
about the fifteenth day the Moon having no bright digit at all is 
invisible. 
The angular distance of 12° from the Sun constitutes one lunar 
day, which is called Tithi in Sanskrit. We may in terms of soli- 
lunar distance express the Hindu lunar day or Tithi as follows : 
When the distance bet- Increasing distance bet- 
ween the Sun and the ween the Sun and the 
Moon is Moon or bright 
fortnight 
From 0 to 12 degrees Tithi 1 
„ 12 24 2 
„ 24 „ 36 3 
„ 36 48 ,, 4 
22 
„ 48 „ 60 Pf P* 5 
<* 60 , 72 H pp 6 
« 72 „ 84 PI 7 
pp 84 , 96 170 Pit 8 
. 96 „ 108 PP P* 9 
„ 108 „ 120 ill 10 
„ 120 „ 132 PP 71- 11 
„ 132 „ 144 99 12 
„ 144 „ 156 H PP 13 
„ 156 „ 168 PP 711 14 
„ 168 
CO o 99 72 15 
Decreasing distance from the Sun 
Now the Moon having reached 180° from the Sun, the distance 
between the two goes on decreasing gradually. 
When the distance bet- Decreasing distance 
ween the Sun and the between the Sun 
Moon is and the Moon or 
dark fortnight 
From 180 degrees to 168 Tithi 
168 156 OP L 
156 144 3 
144 7.7 132 SP 4 
132 9 120 PP 5 
120 108 6 
108 99 96 IP 7 
96 99 84 pp 8 
.7 84 TP 72 PP 9 
97 72 60 PP 10 
77. 60 48 PP ii 
/I 48 36 pp 12 
IP 36 24 >7 13 
97 24 12 PP 14 
79 12 0 99 30 
Readers will note that we have put 30 after 14 because 30 sym- 
bolically represents the end of the lunar month of 30 days. The 
23 
Hindu names of Tithis are given below : 
1. Pratipat 
2. Dwiteeya 
Amavasya Triteeya 
4. Chaturthi 
5. Panchami 
6. Shashthi 
7. Saptami 
8. Ashtaimi 
9. Navami 
10. Dashami 
11. Ekadashi 
12. Dwadashi 
13. Trayodashi 
14. Chaturdashi. 
The Tithi given as 15 is called Poornima or full Moon. The 
Tithi given as 30 is called Amavasya. The end of Amavasya is 
called new Moon. Since the names of the fourteen tithis are the 
same a prefix Shukla Paksha, meaning bright half of the month, 
or Krishna Paksha, meaning dark half of the month, is added to 
indicate whether the Moon is waxing or waning. Some Hindu 
Ephemerides begin with the bright half of the month and take it 
in regular order upto 30, which is the end of the lunar month 
or Amavasya. 
Now if the relative motion of the Sun and the Moon be un- 
changed all Tithis and lunar months would be of equal duration. 
But since the motion of the Sun and the Moon is varying, some- 
times the Moon is faster, at others he is slower; thus the time 
taken by him to cover a particular distance from the Sun is diffe- 
rent and so the durations of the Tithis differ and that of the lunar 
months also. A lunar month's average duration is 29 days, 12 
hours and 44 minutes. 
As the lunar year covers about 354 days and the sidereal year 
is of about 365 days and 6 hours, Hindu astrologers have from 
times immemorial adopted the practice of adding an inter- 
calary month once in about three years. When a lunar month falls 
between two ingresses of the Sun—when the Sun enters a sign 
it is called an ingress—an intercalary lunar month is added. This 
is known in Hindu astrology as Adhikamasa, and bears the same 
name as the just preceding lunar month; but the word Adhika 
or additional is added to indicate that it is an intercalarAshtami 
All this information is provided so that the reader may become 
conversant with the terminology signifying various particulars as 
stated in a Hindu horoscope. 
24 
PANCHANGA 
The Hindu ephemeris is called a Panchanga. The word Panchanga 
means ,five. constituents : 
(i) The day of the week. It is the smite as in English — Sunday, 
Monday Moon's day, Tuesday Mars, Wednesday Mercury, 
Thursday Jupiter, Friday Venus, Saturday Saturn. 
(ii) The Tithi or the lunar day. This has already been explained. 
(iii) The Karana. 
Half of a Tithi is called a Karana. The following table gives 
an idea of the two Karanas into which a Tithi is divided. 
Bright Half of the Month 
(Slz.ukla Paksha) 
t Second 
Karana Karana 
l.Kinstughna Bava 
Balava Kaulava 
3. Taitila Gara 
4. Vanija Vishti 
5. Bava Balava 
6. Kaulava Taitila 
7. Gara Vanija 
Vishti Bava 
9. Balava KaulShukla 
10. Taitila Gara 
11. Vanija Vishti 
12. Bava Balava 
13. Kaulava Taitila 
14. Gara Vanija 
15. Vishti Bava 
Dark Half of the Month 
(Krishna Paksha) 
First 
Tithi Karana 
1 Balava 
2. Taitila 
3. Vanija 
4. Bava 
5. Kaulava 
6. Gara 
7. Vishti 
8. Balava 
9. Taitil 
10. Vanija 
11. Bava 
12. Kaulava 
13. Gara 
14. Vishti 
30. Chatushpada 
Second 
Karana 
Kaulava 
Gara 
Vishti 
Balava 
Taitila 
Vanija 
Bava 
Kaulava 
Gara 
Vishti 
Balava 
Taitila 
Vanija 
Shakuna 
Thus, if you divide the duration of the first lunar tithi of the 
bright half of the month into two parts, during the first half there 
will be Kinstughna Karana, in the second half Bava Karana. 
These seven Karanas, Bava, Balava, Kaulava, Taitila, Gara, 
Vanija and Vishti, come in regular order, as will be evident from 
the, above Table. 
They are repeated eight times in a month. But the Shakuna 
25 
Karana during the latter half of Chaturdashi in the dark half of 
the month, Chatushpade Karana during the first half of Amavasya, 
Naga Karana during the second or last half of Amavasya; and 
Kinstughna Karma during the first, half of the first Tithi in the 
bright half of the month occur only once.. 
Certain predictions for natives bom during particular,, Karana 
have been given in Hindu text-books, but as they are too 'general 
we shall not deal with them here. ••• 
(iv) Nakshatra. This we have already explained. 
(v) Yoga. This is- a Sanskrit word which literally means 'addi- 
tion.' To 'find a Yoga at a particular time the longitudes of the 
Sun and the Moon are added. Whenever the word longitude is 
used, unless otherwise stated they refer to the sidereal longitudes 
and not to the tropical longitudes. If a reader has an Ephemeris 
giving tropical longitudes of planets, such as Raphael's Ephemeris, 
the first step should be to convert them into sidereal ones, by 
deducting the precession of equinoxes and nutation for the parti- 
cular day. The necessary Table is given in Appendix I at the end 
of the book. 
There are 27 Yogas as given below. 
Now to find the Yoga, add the longitudes of the Sun and the 
Moon on a particular date at a particular time. Suppose you have 
to find the Yoga at 5.30 a.m. Indian Standard Time on 1st 
January 1969. 
S. D. M. S* 
The longitude of the Sun 8- 16- 58- 44 
The longitude of the Moon 1- 16- 51- 18 
Total: "HT 3- 50- 2" 
If the Sum exceeds 12 signs, deduct 12 from the figure for signs. 
The degrees, minutes and seconds should be allowed to stand un- 
altered. In the present example, since the number of signs is 10 
only, i.e., less than 12, no question of deducting 12 arises. 
Now the Yoga at the time is determined according to the figure 
arrived at by adding the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon. 
• S.D.M.S. Moans signs, degrees, minutes and seconds. 
26 
S.D.M. S. D. M. Yoga 
0-13-20 Vishkumbh 
1. From 0- 0- 0 to 
2. 0-13-20 to ll176-40 Priti 
3. ff 0-26-40 to 1-10- 0 Ayushmana 
4. 09 1-10-0 to 1-23-20 Saubhagya 
5. 09 1-23-20 to 2- 6-40 Shobhana 
6. 2- 6-40 to 2-20- 0 Atiganda 
7. 09 2-20- 0 to 3- 3-20 Sukarnm 
8. 90 3- 3-20 to 3-16-40 Dhriti 
9. 09 3-16-40 to 4- 0-0 Shoola 
10. 97 4- 0- 0 to 4-13-20 Ganda 
11. 09 4-13-20 to 4-26-40 Vriddhi 
12. 4-26-40 to 5-10- 0 Dhruva 
D. 9 5-10- 0 to 5-23-20 Vyaghata 
14. o. 5=23.20 to 6- 6-40 Harshana 
15. 9, 6- 6-40 to 6-20- 0 Vajra 
16. 9, 6-20- 0 to 7- 3-20 Siddhi 
77. tt 7- 3-20 to 7-16-40 Vyatipata 
18. 99 7.16-40 to 8- 0.0 Variyana 
19. 99 8- 0- 0 to 8-13-20 Parigha 
20. 00 8-13-20 to 8-26-40 Shiva 
21. Of 8-26-40 to 9-10- 0 Siddha 
22. 00 9-10- 0 to 9-23-20 Sadhya 
23. 9, 9-23-20 to 10- 6-40 Shubha 
24. 79 10- 6-40 to 10-20- 0 Shukla 
25. 09 10-20- 0 to 11- 3-20 Brahma 
26. 9, 11- 3-20 to 11-16.40 Indra 
27. 11-16.40 to 12- 0- 0 Vaidhriti 
Now let us find in which sector 10-3-50, the sum of the longi- 
tudes of the Sun and the Moon in the example taken by us falls. 
On going through the above table we find that 23 is from 9-23-20 
to 10-6-40. Against this we find Shubha. So on 1st January 1969 
at 5-30 a.m. there was Shubha Yoga. 
Certain general effects have been described for birth 
according to the month, day of the week, or the Yoga and 
Nakshatra. They are too general and if given would 
unnecessarily add complications. So we have given only the 
effects of important Nakshatras at the end of this Chapter. 
These-the day of the week, Tithi, 
27 
Nakshtra and Yoga—are also taken into account for selection of 
auspicious time for commencing or performing important acts and 
ceremonies. But here we are concerned only with a discussion of 
birth charts. 
Time in Hindu astrology is expressed in Ghatis and Palas. 
One day and ayt = 60 Ghatis 
1 Ghati = 60 Palas 
1 Pala = 60Vipals 
Commonly a day and night is taken to cover 24 hours.* 
So 1 Ghati = 24 minutes 
1 Pala = 24 seconds 
In olden times when there were no watches, time used to be 
computed by sundials or water meters, *hich were cup shaped 
vessels with a small hole at the bottom. These were placed in a big 
can full of water. Water through the hole would gradually enter 
the cup and when filled with water coming into it through the 
fine orifice at the bottom, it would sink to the bottom of the can 
full of water. The markings on the cup indicated the water level 
and with the help of this contrivance time was computed. There 
was another method of measuring time. A small straight stick 
was fixed on level ground, and by measuring the length of the 
shadow cast by this stick, time was computed. All these measures 
havehas. Norobsolete and do not have the precision which a good 
watch has.'Nor is time now spoken of in Ghatis and Palas. It is 
referred to in hours and minutes. So we shall throughout this book 
refer to hours and minutes which are in current usage. 
The Panchangas or Indian Ephemerides continue to give, the 
duration of Tit hi, Nakshatra, Yoga, etc.. in Ghatis and Palas. 
Some have introduced the system of giving the duration in hours 
and minutes also; while other modern Ephemerides give the 
duration in hours and minutes only and not in Ghatis and Palas. 
There are hundreds of Panchangas in current usage in India. 
Local astrologers consider it a mark of respect and prestige to be 
the authors of a Panchanga and so they make one and sell it 
directly or through some publisher. But most of them are incorrect. 
This is due to two reasons. The old formulae given in the Surya 
* Sidereal day in civil hours = 23 hours, 56 minutes, 4 sees. Civil day 
in sidereal hours = 24 hours, 3 minutes, 56 sees. = 24 hours. 
28 
Siddhanta and other astronomical works do not hold good today. 
There has been some variation in the regular motions of the astral 
bodies as given in the older texts. Formerly Hindu astronomers 
used to rectify these formulae by prescribing certain, additions or 
subtractions to arrive at correct results. These additions or sub- 
tractions used to be called Beeja Sanskara. The practice and the 
tradition of providing Beeja Sanskara was discontinued in later 
times. 
The other reason for the inaccuracy of many of the Panchangas 
is that the calculation of daily longitudes of planets for 360 days 
involves much time and labour and a certain amount of mathe- 
matical accuracy and for precision, checking and rechecking is 
necessary and this is lacking in a majority of the Panchangas and 
their authors. 
Most of the up-to-date Panchangas or Ephemerides published 
in India take the longitudes of planets from western Ephemerides 
and convert the tropical longitudes ,into sidereal. 
We would, therefore, suggest that unless correct Hindu Pan- 
changas giving the exact longitudes of planets for each day are 
available readers would do well to use Raphael's Ephemeris, 
convert the Standard Time of birth into Greenwich Mean Time 
and calculate the longitudes. These will, however, be longitudes 
in the tropical zodiac. Deduct the precession of equinoxes and 
nutation on the birth date from the tropical longitudes, and you 
will have the correct longitudes in the sidereal zodiac. 
An objection might be raised that the longitudes given in 
Raphael's or other western Ephemerides are geocentric, i.e., as 
the planets would appear if viewed from the centre of the earth, 
whereas the correct longitudes should be as would appear from 
the place of observation or place of birth on the surface of the 
earth. The distances of the Sun, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, 
and Saturn are so great that the angles between the geographical 
positions and the geocentric positions of the Sun and other planets 
would be very small and therefore negligible. In the case of the 
Moon, due to the distance of the Moon being not so far away 
from the earth, there would be a difference between the two longi- 
tudes as viewed from the place of birth' and the centre of the 
earth, i.e., the geographical position and the geocentric one. This 
is called parallax. But the calculation of parallax involves much 
time and energy and also mathematical ability and it would be 
29 
beyond the scope of this volume to give complete instructions for 
the calculation of parallax. Those who are interested in the study 
and calculations of parallax are advised to refer to more advanced 
books on the subject. 
Even among the current sidereal Ephemerides, such as Lahiri's, 
only geocentric longitudes of the Moon are given and the readers 
are advised to use the geocentric longitudes of the Moon after 
deducting the precession of the equinoxes and nutation from the 
tropical longitudes. 
Once we have calculated the longitudes of the Sun and the 
Moon, we can easily calculate the Nakshatra, Tithi and Yoga. We 
repeat that the Nakshatra is determined by the sidereal longitude 
of the Moon. The Tithi is determined by the relative distance 
between the Sun and the Moon; and Yoga is calculated by adding 
the sidereal longitudes of the Sun and the Moon. So readers can 
calculate these even if they have no Hindu Panchanga. We shall 
work out an example to show how this is done. 
Suppose a person was born at 5-30 a.m. on 1st January 1969, 
Indian Standard Time. First calculate the sidereal longitudes of 
the Sun and the Moon at 5-30 a.m. Indian Standard Time as 
5-30 a.m. will be 12 midnight between 31st December 1968 and 
1st January 1969 Greenwich Mean Time. Now calculate the 
longitudes at 12 midnight Greenwich Mean Time and deduct the 
precession of the equinoxes and nutation from the tropical longi- 
tudes, and you will have the sidereal longitudes of the Sun and 
the Moon. Or take these sidereal longitudes from an ephemeris 
giving sidereal longitudes. 
For example, the sidereal longitudes of the Sun and the Moon 
on 1st January 1969 at 5-30 a.m. Indian Standard Time as given 
in Lahiri's Ephemeris areas follows : 
S. D. M. S. 
Longitude of the Sun 8-16-58-44 
Longitude of the Moon 1-16-51-18 
We have already given an example earlier as to how a Yoga is 
calculated. 
Now let us give an example of how the Nakshatra, Tithi and 
Karana are worked out. To take Nakshatra first, for which we 
require only the Moon's longitude, on referring to an earlier page 
we find that from 1-10-0-0 to 1-23-20-0 is Rohini. So we say that 
30 
the Moon is in Rohini Nakshtra or in the astrological parlance 
there is Rohini Nakshatra. 
When we say today is Rohini Nakshtra, what do we mean? The 
Rohini Nakshatra was in the heavens before today for innumer- 
able centuries and will be even after centuries from today. But 
when we say today is Rohini, it is an abbreviated form of the 
statement, 'the Moon is in Rohini Nakshatra today.' 
Now let us come to Tithi. Convert the signs into degrees and 
the Moon's longitude will be 46° 51' 18". The Sun's longitude 
will be 256° 58' 44". Now subtract the Sun's longitude from the 
Moon's. 
Moon 46° 51' 18" 
Sun 256° 58' 44" 
When the Moon's longitude, as in the present case, is less than 
the Sun's, add 360 degrees to the Moon's longitude and then 
subtract 
Moon 406° 51' 18" 
Sun 256° 58' 44" 
149° 52' 34" 
Now referring to an earlier page we find that this is Shukla 
Paksha Trayodashi. Why Shukla Paksha or the bright half? 
Because the Moon is proceeding towards the opposition of the 
Sun. 
Now Trayodashi Tithi is when the distance of the Moon from 
the Sun is 115to 156°. 
The distance between 144° and 15of6 is 12 degrees. Divide 
this into sectors ofO degrees each: (i) 144 to 150 and (ii) 150 to 
156 degrees. These two sectors represent the two sectors or 
Karanas of Trayodashi. Now in our example the distance 
between the Moon and the Sun is 149° and odd. So this falls 
in the first sector. Now on referring to the relevant page we find 
that durinanuaryrst half of Trayodhashi as on 1st J.Tanuar31969 
at 5-30 a.m. there is Kaulava Karana. 
Certain effects due to birth in a particular month on a particular 
day, when the Moon is in a particular Tithi or Karana have been 
given in different texts. It would be too lengthy to go into all these 
here. So we only give below some particulars of Tithis, Karanas 
and Nakshatras, which are not considered good if a birth takes 
31 
place during them. It is customary for Hindus to perform some 
Shanti or religious propitiation if a child is born during any of 
these. 
Tit his 
(i) Religious propitiation is necessary if the birth is during the 
last 48 minutes or four-fifths of an hour of Panchami or fifth 
lunar day, Dashami or tenth lunar day, Amavasya or 30th lunar 
day, Poornima or full Moon day or 15th lunar day. 
(ii) Krishna Chaturdashi on 14th lunar day of the dark fort- 
night. The entire period is to be divided into six parts; the first 
one-sixth is auspicious and the rest inauspicious and requires 
Shanti or religious propitiation. 
Kamm 
If the birth be hi the Bhadra Karana, as certain evil effects 
have been ascribed to the same, religious propitiation is necessary. 
Vishti Karana is also called Bhadra. 
Yogas 
Birth during any of the following Yogas requires religious 
prayers in the prescribed form : (i) Yamaganda, (ii) Vyatipata, 
(in) Parigha, (iv) Shoola, (v) Vaidhriti. 
Nakshatras 
(i) Ashwini, (ii) Ashlesha, (iii) Magha, (iv) Jyeshtha, (v) Moola, 
(vi) Revati. Particularly significant is the commencement of (i), 
(iii) and (v), and the fag end of (ii), (iv) and (vi), or in other 
words when the longitude of the Moon is between the following: 
(a) 11.26° 40' to 0-3° 20' (b)' 3-26° 40' to 4-3° 20' or 
(c) 7-26° 40' to 8-3° 20'. 
It is customary among orthodox Hindus to perform some 
Shanti or religious propitiation if a child is born when the Moon 
is in any of the above sectors. Similarly if a child is born in a 
particular Nakshatra which happens to be the Nakshatra of either 
parent or a brother or a sister some religious propitiation is made. 
To know the Nakshatra or Moon's position in a particular 
sector of the parent or brother or sister, his or her birth chart 
must be studied. 
We give below some additional information. 
32 
1. If the birth of the child is when the Moon occupies 0° 0' to 
3° 20' in Sagittarius, this adversely affects the father's health; if 
the degree occupied is 3° 20' to 6° 40' in Sagittarius, it is the 
mother who suffers. If the degree is between 6° 40' to 10° there 
is loss of property and if the degree tenanted by the Moon 
is 10° to 13° 20', the child will be prosperous. 
2. (a) When the rising sign is Sagittarius and the degree 
tenanted by the Moon is 13° 20' to 16° 40' in Sagittarius 
there will be trouble to the father. 
(b) When the rising sign is Cancer and the degree tenanted 
by the Moon is 3° 20' to 6° 40' in Cancer the same 
result as in (a) above. 
3. (a) When the rising sign is Sagittarius and the degree 
tenanted by the Moon is 16° 40' to 20°, there will be 
trouble to the mother. 
(b) When Cancer is the ascendant and the degree occupied 
by Moon is 6° 40' to 10° in Cancer, the same effect as 
in (a) above. 
4. (a) When the rising sign is Sagittarius and the degree oc* 
cupied by the Moon 20° to 23° 20' in Sagittarius, the 
health of the child is affected adversely. 
(b) When the rising sign is Cancer and Moon tenants any 
degree from 10° to 13° 20' the same effect as in (a) 
above. 
5. (a) When the rising sign is Sagittarius and the degree oc- 
cupied by Moon is 23° 20' to 26° 40' in Sagittarius, the 
health or fortune of the maternal uncle of the child 
suffers. 
(b) When the rising sign is Cancer and the Moon occupies 
any degree from 13° 20' to 16° 40', the same results as 
in (a) above. 
In Hindu Ephemerides called Panchangas the duration of Tithi, 
Nakshatra, Karana and Yoga is given for each day. From Ephe- 
merides in English these can be calculated as explained in the 
earlier pages. 
CHAPTER 1 
SIGN RISING (ASCENDANT) 
AS stated earlier, in the tropical zodiac the durations of the follow- 
ing signs rising at the eastern horizon at any latitude are equal: 
Aries and Pisces, 
Taurus and Aquarius, 
Gemini and Capricorn. 
Cancer and Sagittarius, 
Leo and Scorpio, 
Virgo and Libra 
At the equator, however, the durations of rising, (even among 
the six signs Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo and Virgo) of 
the following pairs of signs are equal: 
Aries and Virgo, 
Taurus and Leo, 
Gemini and Cancer. 
So that at the equator the following groups of signs rise for 
equal periods: 
Signs Duration „ 
(1) Aries, Virgo, Libra and Pisces 
(2) Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius 
(3) Gemini, Cancer, Sagittarius 
and Capricorn 
Duration 
Mts. 
51 
59 
6 00 00 
34 
The durations given in Hindu books are in Asus or Ghatis and 
Palas * and they have been converted into hours and minutes for 
the convenience of readers. In this book of Hindu astrology we 
are dealing with the basic concepts and practice of Hindu 
astrology, but have explained all calculations in terms of modem 
units of time and not the old obsolete ones. 
As we go higher up from the equator the durations of Aries, 
Taurus and Gemini go on diminishing gradually and those of 
Cancer, Leo and Virgo go on increasing correspondingly. 
The decrease in duration of Aries is increase of Virgo. The 
decrease in Taums is increase in Leo and the decrease in Gemini 
is the increase in Cancer. 
Since we have stated that at all latitudes Aries and Pisces are 
of equal duration, loss in duration of Pisces is gain in duration 
of Libra, loss in duration of Aquarius is gain in duration of 
Scorpio and loss in duration of Capricorn is gain in duration of 
Sagittarius. 
Due to the shape of the Earth, the obliquity of the Earth's 
axis and the ecliptic path of the Earth, the decrease or increase 
in the duration of the rising of signs is not equal, but changes 
from geographical latitude to latitude on the surface of the Earth. 
In Hindu astrology very detailed rules are given for calculating 
the duration of each sign according to the Palabhaor the geogra- 
phical latitude by which the degree rising is calculated. The older 
works of Hindu astrology use Ghati, Palaand 17 ipala as units of 
time. 
The use of the hour and the minute, the modern and the current 
units of time, does not devalue the Hindu system. The principles 
of Hindu astrology will remain the same, but we have found by 
experience that it is far easier for the modern educated man to 
calculate the ascendant and the meridian cusp with this method 
rather than with the aid of the Sarinis given at the end of Hindu 
Panchangas. 
The word Sarini means a Table. The Sarini is found at the 
end of each Panchanga. A Hindu Ephemeris is meant only for the 
latitude of the place for which the Panchangais published and is 
strictly correct only for that year, having the Ayanansha the 
precession of equinoxes and nutation for the year noted on the 
top of the Sarini. 
* Hindu Units of Time. 
35 
The Sun rises according to the Sun's longitude in the tropical 
zodiac and the rise of signs is also according to their positions 
in the tropical zodiac. After calculating the degree ascending, the 
precession of equinoxes and nutation for the day is deducted and 
the tropical degree is converted into the sidereal degree. Now 
what the Sarini does is to deduct the precession of equinoxes and 
nutation and give the readymade sidereal degree. 
Thus if the Sarini is for the latitude of Varanasi and it shows 
the seventh degree of a sign rising and we calculated the ascendant 
for the same time in the year seventy-two years after the prepara- 
tion of the Sarini, the ascendant would be 6° only, because the 
precession or Ayanansha will have during the seventy-two years 
increased by one degree and this has to be deducted from the 
seventh degree which held good seventy-two years back. 
A large number of Hindu horoscopes show the incorrect degree 
and minute of the ascendant rising due to the following errors 
which have imperceptibly crept in. It is necessary to invite 
positive attention to these errors, so that readers may be aware 
of the pitfalls in the current calculations as generally prevalent 
and practised by a large number of Hindu astrologers. Those who 
know take care of the following errors and do not fall into the 
trap, but the number of really learned astrologers who are well 
up in calculations and in making predictions is comparatively 
small. Most astrologers follow their profession as a hereditary 
vocation, and since most of the Hindu families get a nativity 
drawn up when a child is born, the mass production of nativities 
is still in the hands of Hindu astrologers who are not well- 
educated, weak in mathematics and not conscious of their 
responsibility in the undertaking. It is for that reason that we 
advise that before attempting any predictions the rising degree 
and minute of the ascendant should be checked. The errors which 
we have found during the last forty-four years of our practice as 
an astrologer arise out of one or more of the following causes : 
(i) The time of birth recorded in Hindu horoscopes is generally 
indicated as Ishtam. The word Ishtam in Sanskrit means 'wished 
for', 'desired for', 'longed for — the objective or the target.' It is 
expressed in Ghatis and Palas after sunrise. Now the sunrise for 
astronomical purposes is the time when the centre of the Sun is 
on the ecliptic at the eastern horizon. The word sunrise, according 
to Western astrology, is when the upper limb of the Sun is 
36 
visible and the word sunset is used when the complete disc of 
the Sun becomes invisible. Most of the daily newspapers give 
sunrise and sunset timings according to this Western method. 
But in Hindu astrology it is the rising or setting of the centre of 
the Sun's disc which are the corret sunrise and sunset timings. 
And there is positively some difference between the coinci- 
dence, astronomical or truer, of the centre of the Sun with the 
horizon and the visibility of the upper limb of the Sun. Due to 
refraction the centre of the Sun becomes visible 2 minutes 15 
seconds before the actual centre of the Sun's disc coincides with 
the eastern horizon. Besides the time between visibility of the 
Sun's upper limb and the centre is 1 minute 10 seconds 
approximately. So a total of 3 minutes 25 seconds must be 
deducted from the time of visibility of the upper limb to arrive 
at the true or astronomical rise of the Sun's centre. Similarly, to 
arrive at the correct time of setting of the Sun's centre 3 minutes 
25 seconds should be deducted from the generally published 
sunset time. 
(ii) The second error is due to the following factor. In olden 
days, in most of the Indian cities, local time was used. The local 
time was calculated by sun-dials and other methods. Even when 
they started using hours and minutes, 12 noon began to be 
treated as local mid-noon and 12 o'clock as local midnight. 
Modem watches, telephones and radios have now a network all 
over India. The 12 noon by the watch is still erroneously taken 
by thousands of Hindu astrologers as local mid-noon and 12 at 
night as midnight. A man goes to the astrologer and tells him 
that a child was bom at 2 p.m. The astrologer opens his Panchanga 
or Ephemeris and finds that the duration of the day, sunrise to 
sunset, is 33 Ghatis 8 Palas. Half of it will be 16 Ghatis 34 Palas. 
This he takes as the Ghati and Pala at noon, oblivious of the 
fact that 12 o'clock. Indian Standard Time is not mid-noon at all 
longitudes and all latitudes in India. The child is born at 2 p.m., 
the interval since noon is two hours which when converted into 
Ghatis means five Ghatis. The incorrect value for mid-noon 
arrived at by him for 12 o'clock is 16 Ghatis 34 Palas. He adds 
5 Ghatis, i.e. the time elapsed since 12 noon to 16 Ghatis 34 Palas 
and writes : Ishtam 21 Ghatis 34 Palas. 
Now, since the true noon is not the same at all places, what a 
blunder he has committed in fixing the time of birth as 21 Ghatis 
37 
34 Palas. Such blunders are very frequent and we have discussed 
the point here at length so that readers do not fall into the trap. 
(ill) Even when the astrologers look up the correct sunrise 
time in the Panchanga, it is not infrequent, for example, that 
the child is born at Amritsar, but the father of the boy consults 
an astrologer in Delhi and the Panchangavthich the astrologer 
has is for Varanasi alone and not for the whole of India. In 
olden days astrologers had Panchangas calculated for the local 
longitude and latitude, but now some forty or fifty leading 
Panchangas are popular and some astrologers do not even care 
to find out the birth place but proceed on the basis of the 
Panchanga available with him. The scruples about longitude or 
latitude of the place of birth do not worry him. Thus an in- 
correct Ishtam is calculated. 
(iv) The Sarini or Table of Houses used by him is for a latitude 
different from the place of birth and the resulting error is obvious. 
He uses the Table of Houses given as an Appendix in his 
Panchanga though a Panchanga gives the Table of Houses for 
one particular latitude only. 
(v) The Sarinis are rarely revised and difference arising due 
to the changing value of precession of equinoxes and nutation 
is also one of the factors leading to inexactitude as already 
discussed. 
(vi) One of the contributory factors in an incorrect calculation 
of the rising degree and minute of the ascendant as well as of the 
longitudes of planets is the incorrect value of the precession of 
the equinoxes and nutation. This differs from one Hindu 
Panchangato another. 
In order to eliminate all these pitfalls we have given the 
modern trigonometrical method of finding the ascending degree 
and minute by calculating the right ascension of the meridian 
cusp in hours, minutes and seconds. This is very easy. Employing 
the modern methods and the latest technique does not denigrate 
in any way the learned principles and practice of Hindu astrology. 
When we are no longer using Ghatis and Palas in our routine 
observations of time, why should we stick to them in matters 
astronomical? The objective is to calculate the rising degree and 
the minute of the ascendant at a particular time, date and place 
and for that the trigonometrical method is by far the most 
convenient and exact. 
38 
HOW TO CALCULATE THE RISING SIGN 
A number of persons are interested in astrological readings, i.e., 
the influence of planets and at what time of life they would be 
effective; but many of them are reluctant to undertake the 
mathematical calculations. We have, therefore, in this book on 
predictive astrology made an attempt to keep the mathematical 
calculations to the minimum. In fact, there are many detailed 
ways of interpretation of horoscopes and for which detailed 
calculations are required, but if we load this book with such 
diversified and complicated calculations, a large number of 
readers will be scared away from studying the subject and 
applying their knowledge. So we shall confine ourselves in these 
pages to the barest minimum of mathematical calculations. 
The first requirement is the calculation of the rising sign, 
degree and minute on a particular date, at a particular place and 
at a particular time. For this the following data is essential : 
(a) Longitude of birth place 
(b) Latitude of birth place 
(c) Date of birth 
(d) Watch time or the Standard time of the country. 
Given these four items, to calculate the rising degree and 
minute is a very easy and simple matter. 
The first two steps are : 
(i) To convert the Standard time or watch time into local mean 
time. 
(ii) To look up in the Ephemeris, the sidereal time at pre- 
ceding noon, i.e., the noon immediately before the birth time 
and calculate the sidereal time at noon at the place of birth. 
We shall explain both of these steps below. 
Standard Time and Local Mean Time 
The Standard time which the citizens of a place generally use, 
according to the watch, is the civil time as fixed by the govern- 
ment of the country. This time is used by railways, post and 
telegraph offices, government offices, business houses and all civil 
and military personnel and the population at large. 
In India the Standard time is 5 hours and 30 minutes ahead 
of the Greenwich Mean Time. The Standard time in a country 
39 
is generally fixed according to the central meridian of a country. 
This central meridian is not the actual centre or the longitude 
in the exact middle of the country or the political territory it 
governs, but is generally near about the middle. In India, the 
central meridian fixed is 82° 30' East longitude. This was done 
with effect from 1906. Since from one sunrise to another sunrise 
or the next day it takes about 24 hours, or 24 x 60=1440 
minutes, and the Earth has been longitudinally demarcated into 
360°; the difference in sunrise for one degree of longitude, if the 
latitude of the two places is the same, is 1440 360=4 minutes. 
Now 82° 30' the central meridian of India multipled by 4 
would be 330 minutes or 5 hours 30 minutes. Since India is 
east of Greenwich, this period of 5 hours 30 minutes is added 
to Greenwich Mean Time and so when it is 6 a.m. at Green- 
which, it will be 11-30 a.m. in India; when it is 12 noon G.M.T., 
it will be 5-30 p.m. Indian Standard Time, and so on. 
Conversion of Standard Time into Local Mean Time 
Indian Standard Time is the same throughout the entire political 
territory of India. If a person at Calcutta speaks on the phone 
to a person in Bombay and compares the time as shown by his... 
watch with his friend's at Bombay, the two watches should show 
the same time. But while the Sun may have just risen in Calcutta ( 
because Calcutta is about 15° east of Bombay), it may rise 
after about 1 hour at Bombay. Thus the local mean time for the 
two places would be different. 
There are two methods of converting Indian Standard Time ( 
and in a similar manner the standard times in other countries) 
into local mean time. We shall clarify the steps by taking a 
concrete example. 
Suppose we have to find the local mean time for longitude 
11° 13' East, when it is 5-30 a.m. I.S.T. 
(i) The first method is to find the difference between 77° 13' 
and 82° 30' (the central meridian of India) 
82° 30' 
77° 13' 
50 17' 
40 
Multiply 5° 17' by 4 minutes for each degree and we get 21 
minutes 8 seconds. Since 11° 13' is less than 82° 30', the local 
mean time will be less. So, when it is 5-30 a.m. Indian Standard 
Time, it will be 5-8-52 a.m. local mean time at the longitude of 
IT 13' (Delhi). 
(ii) The second method is as follows: 
(a) Convert 5-30 a.m. Indian Standard Time into G.M.T. by 
deducting 5 hours 30 minutes. It would be 12 midnight (previous). 
(b) Now the longitude for which mean time is required is 
11° '13'. Multiply it by 4 minutes for each degree and we get 
5 hours 8 minutes 52 seconds. Add this to G.M.T. (12 midnight) 
and weget 5-8-52 a.m. local mean time. 
Whichever method the reader follows he will arrive at the 
same result. 
Sidereal Time 
Another data, which one requires for finding the rising sign 
or ascendant at a particular place is the sidereal time at preceding 
noon. It is generally given in the Ephemeris for the year. But a 
small correction is necessary. 
Suppose we have to find sidereal time at preceding noon at a 
particular place. If we use Raphael's Ephemeris, the sidereal time 
given therein is for 0° longitude and if we want the sidereal time 
for say Delhi on the same noon, we have to deduct 51 seconds ( 
because Delhi is IT 13' East of Greenwich) from the sidereal 
time at Greenwich and we will have the sidereal time at noon at 
Delhi. We get 51 seconds because 51 is roughly two-thirds of 
IT 13' (Delhi's longitude). We leave out the fraction of seconds. 
If we are using Lahiri's Ephemeris, the sidereal time given 
therein is for the meridian 82° 30' and if we wish to find the 
sidereal time at noon at Delhi, we will have to add 3 seconds 
to it. The difference between Delhi's longitude (77° 13') is about 
5° from 82° 30' and two-thirds of this comes to about 3 seconds. 
We leave out fractions of seconds. We have added 3 seconds 
because Delhi is west of 82° 30' meridian. 
Example 
Find out the sign, ascending degree and minute at Delhi, at 
41 
5-30 a.m. on 1st January 1970. Time and date are already given. 
The longitude of Delhi is 11° 13' East and latitude 28° 40' North. 
(i) the local mean time at Delhi will be 5 8-52 a.m., in hours, 
minutes and seconds, as worked out earlier. 
(ii) the sidereal time at preceding noon, i.e., on 31st December 
1969 as given in Lahiri's Ephemeris is 18 hours, 38 minutes, 
3 seconds, to which we add 3 seconds, as explained above. So that 
the sidereal time at Delhi, on preceding noon comes to 18-38-6. 
Now we proceed to work as follows : 
Hrs. Mts. Sees. 
Sidereal time at preceding noon 18 38 6 
Add time since noon till the local mean 
time of birth 
Add acceleration at 9.8 seconds per hour; 
17-8-52 X 9.8=168 seconds (approx.) or 
2 minutes, 48 seconds 0 2 48 
35 49 46 
If the hours exceed 24, deduct 24 24 0 0 
11 49 46 
The last figure of 11 hours, 49 minutes, 46 seconds is called 
the right ascension of the meridian cusp or the sidereal time of 
birth. 
Now we require the Table of Houses, which gives the degree 
ascending according to the right ascension of the meridian cusp. 
Since Delhi's latitude is 28° 40', we look up in the Table of 
Houses that page which gives the ascending degrees for latitude 
28° 40' North. In the Raphael's Table of Houses we find the 
position as follows : 
Right Ascension of the Sign Rising 
Meridian Cusp 
Hs. Mts. Sees. S D M. 
11 49 0 8 15 19 
11 52 40 8 16 7 
Calculating by rule of three we find that our RAMC cor- 
responds to about 8-15-29, i.e., 15 degrees, 29 minutes 
42 
of sign Sagittarius, since 8 is the number of completed 
signs, the ninth, Sagittarius, was ascending. But Raphael's Table 
of Houses gives the positions in the tropical zodiac. We have 
therefore to deduct the precession of equinoxes and nutation on 
1st January 1970. On reference to Lahiri's Ephemeris we find 
that it was 23° 26' 21". Deducting this from the tropical longitude. 
8-15° 29' 0" 
23 26 21 
7 22 2 39 
We find that the sign ascending was Scorpio (seven completed 
signs means that eighth was rising) and had risen 22 degrees, 
2 minutes, 39 seconds. 
If we look up Lahiri's Table of Houses, we will get the degree 
and minute rising in the sidereal (Nirayan) zodiac directly, because 
Lahiris Table of Houses gives the longitudes in the sidereal 
zodiac. It would not then be necessary to deduct the precession 
of equinoxes and nutation. 
How to Find Longitudes of Planets 
The sign rising is always calculated on the basis of the local 
mean time. If birth time is specified in standard time it must be 
converted into local mean time. But the longitudes of planets 
are always calculated on the basis of standard time (according 
to which the Ephemeris furnishes longitudes). 
On referring to Lahiri's Ephemeris again for 1970, we find 
that the longitudes were as follows : 
S D M 
Sun 8 16 43 
Moon 5 17 15 
Mars 10 18 48 
Mercury 9 5 35 
Jupiter 6 8 53 
Venus 8 11 1 
Saturn 0 8 37 
Rahu 10 20 33 
Ketu 4 20 33 
43 
The Sun's longitude 8-16-43 means 8 completed signs and 
therefore 16° 43 in Sagittarius. So also with the other planets. 
When the longitude is given in figures, the first figure refers to 
the sign completed, the second figure to the degree completed, 
the third figure to the minute completed, and so on. R indicates 
that the planet was retrograde. 
If we wish to calculate the longitudes from Raphael's Ephe- 
meris, first find the longitudes of planets at 12 midnight (on 31st 
Dec. 1969/lst January 1970) for that will correspond to 5-30 a.m. 
Indian Standard Time. And since Raphael's Ephemeris furnishes 
tropical longitudes we will have to deduct the precession of 
equinoxes and nutation to derive the sidereal longitudes. 
Now the following chart can be prepared: 
SUN 9 
VENUS / 7 JUP. 
r 6 
MOON 
Here the ascendant is Scorpio, Sun in Sagittarius, Moon in 
Virgo, Mars in Aquarius, Mercury in Capricorn, Jupiter in Libra, 
Venus in Sagittarius, Saturn in Aries, Rahu in Aquarius, Ketu 
in Leo. 
Different patterns of charts are made in India. In northern, 
north-western and central India, the pattern of chart used is 
shown in Fig. 1. Here the signs are denoted by the numerical 
figure 1 for Aries, 2 for Taurus and so on. The place at the top 
centre is reserved for the sign ascending and then other signs are 
placed in succession anti-clockwise. 
44 
MARS 
RAHU 
Venus ASC. JUP. MOON 
The chart shown in Fig. 2 is the one made in South India. The 
place marked with an asterisk is reserved for Aries. No numerical 
figures are put in for any of the signs. The signs follow Aries, 
Taurus, Gemini, etc. The count is made clockwise round the 
rectangle. The sign rising is marked Asc. or by L which denotes 
Lagna or the ascendant. 
MARS 24 
RAHU 25 
MERC. 31 
KETU 11 SUN 20 
O/ENUS 19 
In eastern India the chart is made as shown in Fig. 3. The 
place marked with an asterisk is reserved for Aries and the 
other signs follow in regular order. The count is made anti- 
clockwise. The sign rising is marked with the letter L. One 
45 
additional feature is that the location of a planet in a particular 
constellation is also indicated by a small figure on top of the 
planet 
LEO MID HEAVEN 
SCORPIO z 
\ 
I/O. 
Co 
AQUARIUS 
Fig. 4 
TAURUS 
Many astrologers in India due to close and constant contact 
with Western astrology have adopted the circular chart as shown 
in Fig. 4. The sign ascending is placed to the left and the count 
is made anti-clockwise. So please remember that in the patterns 
shown in Fig. 1, 3 and 4 the count is made anti-clockwise. Only 
in Fig. 2 is the counting clockwise. 
THE ASCENDING SIGN 
The general effects produced when one or the other sign is 
ascending at the east are as follows : As the effects are modified 
by the sign and house occupied by the lord of the ascendant and 
the planets conjoining with him or aspecting him and also 
46 
according to the planets tenanting or aspecting the ascendant, 
the following effects will be found to change a little for each 
birth chart; yet the basic influence of the ascendant according 
to the sign rising will hold good. 
• 
Aries 
The native has round eyes, which are slightly copper coloured, 
and weak knees. He is proud, heroic, active, aggressive and always 
on the move or fond of walking. He is fond of hot food and 
vegetables, eats quickly and sparingly, is amorous by disposi- 
tion and fond of women; prominent veins or marks of wound 
on body, bad nails; resorts to falsehood in speech; afraid of 
water; generally he is the eldest brother; prosperity is not 
constant; he himself is fickle in temperament but proves a good 
servant. There are sudden outbursts of temper, but he is easily 
pleased. 
It is better if the rising degree is 0° to 3° 20' and Mars is 
strong, occupying or aspecting the ascendant. 
Taurus 
Agreeable appearance; broad face and thighs. There is some 
mark on the back or sides; walks sportingly; good digestive 
powers; many have luck in agricultural work, and may possess 
cows and cattle;* lucky and prosperous; fond of women. The 
native has a spirit of sacrifice and puts up with hard labour; 
has more daughters than sons. He is left alone by his previous 
relations; his sons may forsake him, but the native has per- 
manent friends. The middle and the last one-third parts of life 
are generally more comfortable. 
It is good if the rising degree is between 13° 20' and 16° 40' 
and Venus fully aspects the ascendant or occupies it; Venus in 
seventh would strengthen the ascendant but would be unfavour- 
able for conjugal matters. 
Gemini 
Comely appearance, Prominent nose, dark eyes,t curly hair, 
fond of food; sweet speech, learned, jocular, well up in the art 
* Cannot generally apply to town dwellers. 
t Cannot always apply to people of Western countries, who generally 
do not have dark eyes. 
47 
of gambling; understands the intentions of others; fond of singing 
and dancing. Clever in amorous arts, voluptuous, attached to 
many women; friendship with imbecile and impotent persons; 
acts as a good ambassador. Such a native prefers to live indoors. 
It is better if the rising degree is 26° 40' to 30° and Mercury 
occupies the ascendant or aspects it. 
Cancer 
Not very tall, thick neck, broad waist, walks swiftly and not 
in a straightline, intelligent, fond of astrology or is an astrologer; 
likes to live near water; has many friends and is attached to 
them; owns houses; has a few sons; his fortunes wax and wane 
like the Moon; he can be brought round by persuasion. He is 
under the considerable influence of his wife or of women. 
It is better if the rising degree is 0° to 3° 20' and the Moon has 
good Pakshabala*and aspects the ascendant or occupies it. 
Leo 
Yellowish eyeballs, prominent chin, large face, proud; has a 
few sons. The native has a sacrificing spirit, is of fixed determina- 
tion, but gets unjustifiably into a temper at the slightest provoca- 
tion and the anger is not quickly pacified; does not get on well 
with women; is fond of forests and mountains; is a favourite of 
his mother. The native is courageous, heroic and capable of pre- 
vailing upon others. Suffers from hunger, thirst (or diseases arising 
therefrom), mental and dental ailments. 
It is good if the Sun is strong in the ascendant or tenth house 
and the rising degree is 13° 20' to 16° 40'. 
Virgo 
Drooping shoulders and arms, shy and languid eyes, happy 
and comfortable life, speaks slowly and truthfully, clever in arts 
and crafts, enjoys others' wealth and houses, fond of female 
company; religious, learned, discriminating, with intelligence and . 
good memory; more daughters than sons; lives at a place other 
* Waxing Moon is considered stronger than waning Moon. Moon 
having 8 or more digits is considered as being strong in Pakshabala. 
Author's view is: The Moon having less than 5 digits is weak, with 5 to 
10 digits of medium strength and with more than 10 digits strong in 
Pakshabala. 
48 
than his homeland. 
It is good if the rising degree is 26° 40' to 30° and Mercury 
strong in the first house or tenth. 
Libra 
Tall, lean body, prominent nose, fond of walking or travelling, 
suffers in some limb, gets setbacks in health due to slight causes 
but easily recovers; intelligent, clean, very active, devoted to gods 
and Brahmanas; has two popular names (one of them after a 
god); a few sons; clever in purchase and sale of goods; acts 
impartially as an arbitrator; wealthy, skilful and leads a com- 
fortable life. Substantial increase in wealth and status only in the 
latter part of life. 
It is positively good if the rising degree is 0° to 3° 20' and 
Venus is strong, tenanting or aspecting Libra. 
Scorpio 
Big eyes, broad chest, round thighs, knees and calves; sole of 
feet having fish line on it; cruelly inclined; loses father or a 
senior member in early period of life; sickly during childhood; 
occupies a good position in service; respected by the king or 
government. 
It is lucky if the rising degree is between 13° 20' and 16° 40' 
and Mars is strong, aspecting or tenanting Scorpio. 
Sagittarius 
Large head and neck, prominent nose and ears, bent shoulders, 
good fleshy arms, big teeth and lower lip; bad nails; active and 
engaged in work; eloquent in speech; religious and prepared to 
sacrifice for others; inimical to relations; overpowers enemies; 
cannot be brought round by force, but can be prevailed upon 
by persuasion only. 
It is better if the degree rising is 26° 40' to 30° and Jupiter is 
strong and' aspects the ascendant or occupies it. 
Capricorn 
Good eyes, lower part of the body below the waist under- 
developed compared to the upper half; thin waist; suffers from 
diseases arising out of Vata (wind); allergic to winter or cold; 
dotes upon his wife and children; makes a big show of being 
religious (though in reality he may not be so religious); cruel, 
49 
avaricious, fortunate and prosperous; accepts advice tendered; 
has good stamina, fond of walking; indolent; a connoisseur of 
poetry; devoid of shame, attached to an elderly lady related to 
the native. 
It is better if the degree rising is 0° to 3° 20' and Saturn is 
strong and occupies the ascendant or aspects it. 
Aquarius 
Large face, neck, back, stomach, waist, thighs and feet; ears 
large and with hair; rough hair* on a large body like that of a 
pitcher; prominent veins; indulges in sinful acts for the sake of 
others' wives; fond of good scents and flowers; avaricious; 
capable of putting up with hard labour or trying journeys; 
clever in attacking others, not wealthy himself but utilises the 
wealth of others; his fortunes wax and wane like the Moon. 
It is better if the degree occupied is between 13° 20' and 
16° 40' when the evil influences will be at their minimum and 
the good ones at their maximum; particularly so, if Saturn is 
in the ascendant or strong and aspects the rising sign. 
Pisces 
Lustrous face; fine body, large head, prominent nose; propor- 
tionate limbs, beautiful eyes. Attached to wife; fond of good 
clothes; is under the influence of wife or women; overcomes his 
enemies, wealthy, gets money connected with water or from 
goods and men across the seas; may come across buried treasure 
or may get wealth without much effort; is learned and grateful; 
drinks water frequently and in large quantities. 
The ascendant would become stronger (for the good) if the 
degree rising is 26° 40' to 30° and a strong Jupiter occupies the 
ascendant or aspects it. 
Ascendant 
Birth at (1) the fag end of Pisces or commencement of Aries, 
(ii) at the fag end of Cancer or commencement of Leo, (iii) at 
the fag end of Scorpio or beginning of Sagittarius, is inauspicious 
and requires sacred prayers (religious propitiation). 
The texts state that such a birth curtails longevity of mother 
' This will not apply to ladies because they do not have hair on body 
as men have. 
A.-4 
50 
and the child passes a delicate childhood, but if he survives he 
becomes a very illustrious person. 
Note: The effects ascribed above for each of the signs, if rising 
at the horizon at the time of birth, can be applied also to the 
Moons' position in the sign, in addition to those described for 
Moon's location in various signs as given in chapter 8. 
CHAPTER 
THE SIGNS 
there are twelve signs. A sign is called a Rashi in Sanskrit. 
The word Rashi literally means a heap, a cluster. As a sign in 
the zodiac was identified by the characteristic heap or cluster of 
the stars constituting it, it came to be known as a Rashi. This 
is a general term for a sign, but in Hindu astrology the sign in 
which the Moon is placed at the time of birth is commonly 
referred to as Rashi. When a brief question is put to a person, " 
what is your Rashi?" it means in which sign the Moon was at 
the time of your birth? 
As we shall have occasion to see, the Moon sign (the sign which 
was occupied by the Moon at birth) is as important as the sign 
ascending at birth (the ascendant). Rather, for purposes of 
transists of planets and their effects the importance given to the 
Moon sign is even greater than the ascendant. The Moon sign is 
considered a co-ascendant and we shall in this work refer to 
it as the lunar ascendanfor Moon sign. 
In Western astrology, the Sun sign (the sign in the tropical 
zodiac occupied by the Sun at the time of birth) is of great 
importance and many books have been written delineating the 
astrological characteristics peculiar to births according to the 
Sun sign. A number of newspapers and magazines give weekly 
predictions on this basis. But in Hindu astrology, the Sun sign 
or the position of the Sun in a particular sign is not given such 
overwhelming importance. The Sun's location in a particular sign 
52 
or house is just a factor like the location in a particular sign or 
house of Mars or Jupiter or of any other planet. But in case of 
the Moon, the older Sanskrit works emphasise again and again 
the importance of judging from the Moon sign (the lunar ascen- 
dant) as well as from the ascendant (the rising sign). While 
taking transits into consideration, the count is always made 
from the Moon sign. In more detailed consideration of the 
transits, cognisance is taken of all the seven planets and the 
ascendant. This is however done only when elaborate calculations 
are undertaken and the complete details of a birth chart are 
available; but generally the Moon sign is taken as the centre and 
predictions based on the Moon's radical position (the sign 
occupied by the Moon at birth) are published in many Indian 
newspapers and magazines. For further details in regard to 
transits and their effects, readers are referred to chapter 16 
on Transits. Here it is only necessary to emphasise that the 
single word Rashi is generally interpreted as indicating the 
Moon sign. 
The rising sign is referred to as Lagna-rashi or simply as 
Lagnam. The names of the twelve signs have been given before. 
However some attributes or characteristics of each sign are given 
below. These characteristics apply to the sign whether they are 
at the eastern horizon or anywhere else. 
(1) The zodiac is taken as representing the body of eternal 
time. The Sanskrit word used by Hindu astrologers is Kala- 
Purusha and many learned and philosophical dissertations on 
time find a place in Sanskrit texts. The eternal time which has 
no beginning and no end is identified as God, the supreme power 
of the universe; and just as the hour hand, the minute hand and 
the second hand of the watch are tokens or indicators of time 
by a watch, so also the Earth's movement on the ecliptic is 
treated as ,the hand of eternal time (God). This ecliptic has been 
referred to mythologically as the Sudarshan Chakra (the 'grand 
splendid wheel') in the hand of God. This zodiac has also been 
referred to as the 'grand white python' whose hood has a thousand 
glistening gems, the stars. But we are not concerned here with 
these philosophical matters. Let us confine ourselves to the 
ecliptic and the conception that it represents the body of the " 
Eternal Time' or Kala-Purusha. The various signs constituting 
his body are as follows 
53 
1. Aries Head (top portion) 
2. Taurus Face (including the neck)* 
3. Gemini Upper portion of chest and arms 
4. Cancer Heart, breasts, portion above the stomach 
5. Leo Stomach, portion above the navel 
6. Virgo Portion below navel and above Basti 
7. Libra Basti 
8. Scorpio Genitals, anus 
9. Sagittarius Thighs, hips 
10. Capricorn The two knees, back 
11. Aquarius Calves of legs 
12. Pisces Feet 
What is Basti? If we take the part of the body commencing 
from the navel to the genitals and divide it horizontally into two 
parts, the upper portion represents Virgo and the lower portion 
Libra. This lower half of the portion (from the navel to the 
genitals) is called Basti. 
If any sign is tenanted by a Papa§ — malefic or aspected by a 
Papa, the corresponding part of the body suffers from disease. 
If any sign is tenanted by a Shubha (auspicious) or aspected 
by Shubha, the corresponding parts of the body will be healthy 
and strong. So it follows that if any sign is strong and its lord 
is strong, the corresponding part of the body of the person whose 
nativity is under consideration will be strong and healthy; and if 
any sign is weak and its lord weak, the corresponding part of 
the body of the native will be weak or lack in vigour and 
vitality. 
Let us clarify this further. Irrespective of the ascendant (rising 
sign at birth), i.e., whether Leo be ascending or not, in a nativity 
in which malefics occupy Leo, the native will have stomach 
trouble as Leo represents this part of the body. Also Leo as 
the fifth sign of the Kala-Purusha signifies children,+ he will not 
be very fortunate in respect of children if Leo and its lord are 
weak or tenanted or aspected by malefics. 
To take another example, if Sagittarius is strong and favourably 
tenanted, say, by its lord Jupiter, the native will be religious and 
* According to one view the neck is governed by Gemini. 
§ Papa. This Sanskrit word has been explained in Chapter 6. 
+ For details See Chapter 7. 
54 
devoted to gods. He will have benefits from foreign lands and 
foreign people, i.e., all matters governed by the ninth sign. 
Now the above analogy of the parts of the body (of the Kala- 
Purusha) corresponding to the body of the person whose birth 
chart is under study, is based on the theory yat pinde tat 
brahrnande' (whatever is in the universe has a replica in the 
human body). This is one of the cardinal principles of Hindu 
philosophy. Astrology among Hindus has the status of astral 
philosophy. Astrology and religion are so closely intertwined that 
it is difficult to separate the one from the other. The theory of 
"as above so below" is also well established in other systems of 
thought, because it is one of the fundamental theories of creation 
and has been dealt with as microcosm and macrocosm. The entire 
theory of astrology is based on this principle. If at the time of 
one's birth, the Sun high above in the heavens was afflicted, 
one's solar qualities will be of low order and a handicap for one 
in life; if the Moon was full and tenanting a friends' sign and 
aspected by benefics and in a good house (the Moon's position 
in the sky in relation to the longitude and latitude of birth-place 
on earth), the lunar qualities will be strong and one will achieve 
laurels in affairs governed by the Moon, and so 
So if any part of the Kala-Purusha was afflicted at birth, the 
corresponding part of the native's body would be afflicted. Just 
as the theory is applied to the birth-chart by commencing from 
Aries, so also is it applied by commencing from the first house 
or the ascendant (the sign rising). Here the correspondence of 
various houses to the different parts of the body is as follows : 
1. House Head 
2. Face (including the neck) 
3. 3, Neck, upper portion of the chest and arms. 
(some include throat in 3rd house) 
4. Heart, breasts, portion above the stomach 
5. The stomach, portion above the navel 
6. Part below navel and above Basti 
7. 9, Basti 
8. Genitals, anus 
9. Thighs, hips 
10. The two knees, back 
11. Calves of legs 
55 
If any house is afflicted, the corresponding part of the body 
will suffer. If any house is strong, the corresponding parts of 
the body be strong. We have explained this fully and need 
not reiterate. 
The physical appearance of the tweleve signs is as follows : 
Aries, a ram; Taurus, a bull; Gemini, a couple of human 
beings—the male holding a club in his hand and the female 
holding a Veena*; Cancer, a crab; Leo, a lion; Virgo, a girl 
in a boat holding a sheaf of corn in one hand and a fire in the 
other; Libra, a man holding scales in his hand; Scorpio, a 
scorpion; Sagittarius, a man with a bow and arrow in hand 
riding a horse or in other words, the first half a man the latter 
half a horse; Capricorn, the first half representing the head of 
a deer, the latter half a crocodile; Aquarius, a man holding an 
empty pitcher on his shoulder; Pisces, two fish with their 
heads pointing to in opposite directions. 
These signs have been classified as living in (i) forest, (ii) 
village, (hi) water, etc. If a sign in a birth chart shows gain, the 
benefit should be ascertained from (i) forest, (ii) village, (hi) water, 
etc., according to the sign. If a sign denotes harm, enmity, loss, 
death, etc., due to a particular sign, the source of harm should 
be assigned according to the characteristics of the sign. These 
characteristics should also be used for determining the property ( 
moveable or immoveable) destroyed, thief, etc. Suppose at the 
time of a query Taurus rises. The query is 'where is my stolen 
property kept?' As Taurus represents the fields, the reply would 
be in the fields. If Cancer rises, as Cancer represents water, the 
reply would be in the water, and so on. So details regarding 
each sign are necessary. 
Aries—During the day roams in the forest and at night in 
the village. Taurus—A cultivated field. Gemini—A village ( 
formerly there were few towns. Now we would include cities 
also). Cancer—Water. Leo—Forest. Virgo—Boat, field, watery 
places, where fire or grain is kept. Libra—A road, street or a 
shop. Scorpio—A hole. Sagittarius—A village (we would now 
include a city), places where cavalry or contingents of armies are 
stationed, arsenals, military depots, etc. Capricorn—The first 
half forest, the second half water. Aquarius—Village. Pisces— 
watery places. 
* Veena is a musical instrument. 
56 
During the age, these texts were written, the village, forest and 
waters were sufficient. Now, we have to include towns and cities 
under the term village. 
Elaborating the above the following has also been allotted to 
the twelve signs: 
Aries. The place of jewels, metals, fire, the earth's surface 
having jewels and minerals underneath. 
Taurus. The forest or field, table-land where cattle or agri- 
culturists reside, field with water where paddy is grown. 
Gemini. The places where dancers, singers, artists, women of 
pleasure reside, a bedroom, the place for sexual enjoyment and 
indoor sports, where cards or other kinds of betting goes on in 
rooms, gambling dens, etc. 
Cancer. Watery fields where paddy is grown, wells, tanks, 
banks of river, where there is an abundance of plants, shrubs and 
trees due to moisture and extra humidity, a chasm with water. 
Leo. The regions of deep forest, mountains, hills and hillocks, 
forts. 
Virgo. The place of artisanship, places of enjoyment of women, 
pasture land, land with corn. 
Libra. High land where corn is grown (grain was the chief 
commodity or merchandise and Libra represents the scales for 
weighing), streets, shops, a rich man's place of abode (the mer- 
chants used to be rich), a merchant's .house. 
Scorpio. Places having holes or cavities where serpents and 
others live, poison, crevices in hillocks or mountains, hidden 
places. 
Sagittarius. The places where horses, chariots, elephants live, 
where Yajnas (religious sacrifices) are performed. This is due to 
the relationship of the ninth sign with religion. The king's 
residence. 
Capricorn. Rivers, forest, watery places, rich or. abounding in 
water, banks or sides of a river or mountain. 
Aquarius. Places where water has dried up, where men who 
manufacture liquors or birds live, gambling dens, place in the 
house where pots are kept, the place frequented by potters. 
Pisces. Religious and holy places (due to Jupiter being the 
lord of Pisces), rivers where sacred baths are undertaken, seas, 
oceans, places where there are temples and shrines, where 
Brahmanas (the first among the four castes of Hindus) live. Tradi- 
57 
tionally Brahmanas are associated with religion, piety, holiness, 
etc. 
COUNTRIES 
Patala 
Kamata the modern kamataka 
Cliera 
Qida 
Pandya 
Kerala 
Kollasa 
Malaya 
Saindhava-the modem Sind 
North Panchala 
Yavana 
Koshala 
These are the old names of regions as they were known in 
ancient India. 
COLOURS 
The colours of the twelve signs are as follows : 
Aries—Blood red; Taurus—White; Gemini—Parrot green; 
Cancer—Whitish red; Leo—pale white like smoke; Virgo— 
Variegated or multi-coloured; Libra—Black; Scorpio—Golden; 
Sagittarius—Brownish; Capricorn—Whitish yellow; Aquarius— 
Darkish white; Pisces—White. According to one view, Pisces has 
the colour of a fish but fish are of different colours. 
When a planet tenants a sign the planet's colour is also reflected 
in the sign. If a planet aspects a sign then also its colour is 
reflected. We may explain this by an example; a bottle may 
have a distinctive colour of its own but if a liquid of any 
particular colour is put into it or a coloured light -is thrown on 
the bottle, the colour of the bottle will differ according to the 
blending of colours — its own natural colour and the colour of 
the liquid poured into it or the coloured light thrown upon it. 
The use of the colours of the signs is to indentify the colour 
of the lost article or the native whose birth chart is under con- 
58 
sideration or to ascertain the complexion of the wife or husband 
from the seventh house and so on 
CASTES 
Aries, Leo, Sagittarius are Kshatriyas (the warrior class); 
Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn are Vaishyas (the trading class); 
Gemini, Libra and Aquarius are Shudras (the serving class); 
Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces are the Brahmana caste (the priestly 
class). 
If a particular sign is on the cusp of a good house, gain or be- 
nefit from persons of that caste is indicated; if a sign is on the cusp 
of the sixth house, enmity by persons of corresponding caste is 
indicated, and so on. Of course, when we come to planets (see 
Chapter 6), we shall have to take the caste of planets also 
into account and mark what they indicate according to the 
caste of the planet, tenanting or aspecting a particular sign which 
is on the cusp of the house and regarding which judgment is to 
be had. 
MALE AND FEMALE 
Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagittarius and Aquarius are male 
signs. Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, Capricorn and Pisces are 
female signs. The male signs are dominating, active and agres- 
sive; the female signs are mild and passive. 
If the ascendant, the Moon, the Sun and other planets and 
particularly the ascendant and the Moon, are in male signs, the 
native will be pushing and overbearing; conversely if they are 
in female signs, the native will be passive and accommodating. 
If the ascendant and the Moon in a woman's nativity are in male 
signs, her form and temperament will be manly. 
ODD AND EVEN SIGNS 
Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagittarius and Aquarius are odd 
signs; Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, Capricorn and Pisces are 
even signs. 
When planets are posited in signs, they colour and modify 
the resulting effects. Thus if Jupiter and Venus are in an odd 
59 
sign, the natural effect of aggressiveness would be subdued by 
the benefic influence of Jupiter and Venus. Conversely, if Mars 
or Saturn tenant an even sign, despite the sign being an even 
one, the malefic nature of Mars and Saturn would assert itself 
and the native would be far from being mild or submissive. 
In odd signs, even the products or things signified by the signs 
are rough, rugged and hard, while in even signs, the products or 
material indicated are soft and smooth. Persons born in odd 
signs have stamina and hardihood; those born in even signs are 
fickle and have the finer qualities of women. If there are many 
planets in odd signs, the native will be courageous and dashing; 
if in even signs, the reverse will be the effect. 
WATERY AND WATERLESS SIGNS 
Cancer, Scorpio, Capricorn and Pisces are watery signs; Taurus, 
Gemini, Virgo and Aquarius are Toyashraya, i.e., dependant on 
water. Aries, Leo, Libra and Sagittarius traverse waterless 
regions. 
MOVABLE AND FIXED SIGNS 
Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn are movable signs. They 
are called Cham. Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius are fixed. 
They are called Sthira. Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces have 
the qualities of movable as well as fixed and are called common 
or Dwriswabhava. According to one school, the taut fifteen 
degrees of Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces are movable, 
while the first fifteen degrees show the characteristics of fixed 
signs. 
Work commenced, such as a journey, when a movable sign is 
ascending is quickly completed; while matters, such as 
occupying a house for residence or occupying a chair in the 
office, commenced when a fixed sign is ascending will last for a 
long time. 
In birth charts, when the ascendant is a movable sign, the 
native is fond of walking and travelling and particularly so if 
the lord of the ascendant is also in a movable sign. If a fixed 
sign be rising, the native would be of sedentary habits, 
particularly if the lord thereof is also in a fixed sign. 
60 
DIRECTIONS 
Aries, Leo, Sagittarius East 
Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn South 
Gemini, Libra, Aquarius West 
Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces North 
If a particular sign is strong and occupies the ninth or the 
eleventh house there may be luck or gain of money in that direc- 
tion. If a particular sign is weak or afflicted and occupies an 
adverse place in the birth chart, there _day be bodily or mental 
suffering if the native proceeds to or sets up his business or abode 
in that direction. 
When undertaking a journey, if the ascendant or Moon occupies 
a sign indicating the direction one is going towards, the journey 
will be fruitful. If the ascendant or the Moon is on the left, there 
would only be waste of money; if at the back, the journey will 
be unsuccessful. If on the right, fairly good results will fellow. 
BLIND AND DEAF SIGNS 
Aries, Taurus and Leo are blind at midnight; Gemini, Cancer 
and Virgo are blind at noon; Libra and Scorpio are deaf in the 
fore-noon; Sagittarius and Capricorn are deaf in the afternoon. 
If in a nativity, the birth is found to be at midnight and any 
of the signs Aries, Taurus or Leo be in the second or twelfth 
houses (or in eighth or sixth) and tenanted by malefics, there 
are chances of the native becoming blind. If the birth be at 
noon, judge in a similar manner by reference to Gemini, Cancer 
and Virgo. Judge similarly in regard to deafness. The third house 
represents the right ear, the eleventh the left. 
LAME SIGNS 
Sagittarius and Capricorn are lame and become harmful or fatal 
during the Scmdhi at the junction of Sagittarius and Capricorn, i.e., 
when Saggittarius is ending and Capricorn is commencing. Accord- 
ing to another school they show their evil effect at the junction of 
day and night, i.e., if the birth be during the morning or at 
twilight. 
61 
DIURNAL AND NOCTURNAL SIGNS 
Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Aquarius and Pisces are diurnal 
signs. They are strong during the day; Aries, Taurus, Gemini, 
Cancer, Sagittarius and Capricorn are nocturnal signs and are 
strong at night. The "day is taken as from sunrise to sunset. From 
sunset to sunrise it is night. 
BIPED, QUADRUPED, ETC., SIGNS 
Gemini, Virgo, Libra, the first half of Sagittarius and Aqua- 
rius are human and biped signs. Aries, Taurus, Leo, and 
the latter, half of Sagittarius and the first half of Capricorn are 
quadruped signs; the latter half of Capricorn and Pisces are 
watery signs; Scorpio is reptile or a crawling animal sign. 
According to one view, Cancer also is a crawling animal sign, 
but according to others it is a watery sign. The latter half of 
Capricorn and Pisces are taken as Keeta — an insect — crawling 
animal, but the majority view - is that these are watery signs. 
Human signs are strong if they fall on the cusp of the first house. 
Quadrupeds are strong if they fall on the tenth cusp. Watery signs 
are deemed to be endowed with strength if they are on the fourth 
cusp. Reptile signs are strong on the seventh cusp. 
Biped signs are strong during the day. Quadruped signs are 
strong at night. Reptile signs are strong at dawn and at sunset. 
As the twelve signs here have been placed in three categories 
only, Cancer, Scorpio, the latter half of Capricorn and Pisces have 
to be treated as crawling signs. 
If a sign is tenanted or aspected by its lord or Mercury or 
Jupiter and by no other planet, it is strong. Some texts include 
Venus also along with Mercury and Jupiter. But according to 
others, unless Venus is specifically stated for purpose of Yoga, 
his tenancy gives diplomacy but his aspect spoils it. 
Conversely, if it is tenanted or aspected by others it would not 
be strong. The more the malefic tenanting or aspecting, the weaker 
and worse would be the sign. The Sun is Krura (cruel) and imparts 
heat to the sign it tenants. 
It is not good to have the lord of a sign in the 6th, 8th or 12th 
from the sign. 
Signs in angles (Kendra) are strong. Those in succedent 
62 
(Panaphar)are of medium strength. Those in Cadent houses* ( 
Apoklima) are weak. 
MINERAL VEGETABLE AND ANIMAL SIGNS 
The Sanskrit words for the three respectively are (1) Dhatu. 
(2) Moola, and (3) Jeeva. Dhatus include minerals and metals, 
and even clay, lime, stone, etc. Moola includes all plants, shrubs 
and trees; and Jeeva, all living being down from an insect to a 
human being. 
Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn represent Dhatu; Taurus, 
Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius stand for Moola; and Gemini, Virgo, 
Sagittarius and Pisces for Jeeva. 
If a malefic planet indicates loss, it may inflict loss of metal ( 
wealth), plants (crop), or of life, according to the characteristic 
of the sign and the planet. Similarly, if the planet is a benefic, it 
may cause gain of metal (coins made of metal), crops, life of the 
native or one of his relations as the case may be. 
SHORT AND LONG SIGNS 
Aries, Taurus, Aquarius and Pisces are short; Gemini, Cancer, 
Sagittarius and Capricorn are neither short nor long but are 
medium; Leo, Virgo, Libra and Scorpio are long. 
We have already stated that the twelve houses from the ascen- 
dant to the twelfth house correspond to the twelve parts of the 
body. Now, if a short sign falls on the cusp of a house, the part 
of the body governed by that house will be short, and particularly 
so if the lord of the sign also tenants a short sign. For example, if 
Aries is rising and its lord Mars is in Pisces, as the signs involved 
are both short, the head will not be large, but small. Conversely, if 
Scorpio is rising (this is a long sign) and its lord Mars is in Virgo ( 
this also is a long sign), the head would be large. 
Of course, planets tenanting a particular house would also 
accordingly make the part of the body small or large. Besides 
the general nature of the constitution of the body, whether it is 
bilious, windy or phlegmatic, has also to be taken into account. 
* 1st, 4th, 7th and 10th houses are called angles; 2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th 
houses are called succedent; 3rd 6th, 9th and 12th houses are called 
cadent houses. 
63 
In horary astrology, if a short sign ascends, the inference drawn 
is that the article stolen has been taken away a short distance 
only; if it is of medium size, the article has been removed to a 
medium distance, and if a long sign ascends, it has been taken to 
a long distance. 
SIGNS RISING WITH HEAD OR BACK OR BOTH WAYS 
Certain signs rise with the head first. These are Gemini, Leo, 
Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Aquarius. They are called Shirshodaya (or 
rising with head first). Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Sagittarius and 
Capricorn rise with their hind portion first and they are called 
Pristhodaya (or rising with their hind portion). Pisces rises both 
ways, that is, it has the characteristics of both types. 
The Shirshodaya signs are benefic. If benefic planets are posited 
therein, they become still more benefic. Pristhodaya signs are not 
auspicious. If a Papa (malefic) tenants a sign of this group he 
becomes even more malefic. Pisces has the qualities of Shirshodaya 
as well as Pristhodaya. In other words, if a malefic is in 
Pristhodaya, he becomes very malefic; if there is a benefic therein, 
it does not remain so benefic. 
The Shirshodaya signs or planets posited therein show their 
effect in the earlier part of their Dashas. The Pristhodaya signs 
or planets posited in them show their effects in the latter part of 
their Dashas. Pisces has characteristics of both and planets posited 
therein show their effect during the middle portion of the Dashas. 
SOLAR AND LUNAR SIGNS 
The Sun is the lord of Leo and the Moon is the lord of Cancer. 
But the zodiac itself is divided into two sectors; (1) Leo, Virgo, 
Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius and Capricorn — these comprise the 
solar signs; (2) Cancer, Gemini, Taurus, Aries, Pisces ;and Aqua- 
rius — these comprise the lunar sector. 
People born with all planets in the solar sector are brave, 
courageous and heroic, while those born in the lunar sector are 
soft and mild and prefer to enjoy life safely. 
LORDSHIP OF SIGNS 
The names of the lords of the signs are as follows : 
64 
Aries 
Taurus 
Gemini 
Cancer 
Leo 
Virgo 
Libra 
Scorpio 
Sagittarius 
Capricorn 
Aquarius 
Pisces 
Mars 
Venus 
Mercury 
Moon 
Sun 
Mercury 
Venus 
Mars 
Jupiter 
Saturn 
Saturn 
Jupiter 
At first glance there appears to be no order in the allotment 
of the lordship of signs. But, in fact, this superficial view is an 
erroneous inference. As counted from the Sun, Mercury is 
nearest to him, then comes Venus, then Mars, then Jupiter, 
while Saturn is the most distant. 
The Moon shines in the reflected light of the Sun. The two are 
the luminaries. The signs from Leo to Capricorn in order are in 
the Sun's portfolio, and the other six counted from Cancer back- 
wards up to Aquarius fall in the portfolio of the Moon. Now 
the sign next to Leo has been allotted to Mercury because Mercury 
is nearest to the Sun and Gemini, the sign next to Cancer ( 
in the reverse order) is also allotted to Mercury. Then, in point 
of distance from the Sun is Venus. So the sign next to Virgo, i.e.. 
Libra is allotted to Venus. Similarly, next to Gemini in reverse 
order is Taurus and its lordship is assigned to Venus. Then 
comes Mars. He gets one sign next to Libra in the regular order, 
namely, Scorpio and another sign next to Taurus in reverse 
order, namely, Aries. After Mars in point of distance from the 
Sun comes Jupiter. So he gets Sagittarius, the sign next to 
Scorpio in regular order, and one sign in the reverse order, next to 
Aries. The most distant, being Saturn he gets the sign next to 
Jupiter's in the regular order as well as in the reverse order. 
The sign next to Sagittarius in order is Capricorn. And the sign 
next to Pisces in the reverse order is Aquarius. So Saturn gets 
Capricorn and Aquarius. 
See chapter 6 on planets for information as to which planet 
is exalted in which sign and which is the highest exaltation degree 
65 
or sign of debilitation and deepest debilitation degree. For Moola 
Trikona signs also see chapter 6. 
AUSPICIOUS DEGREES OCCUPIED BY THE MOON IN 
VARIOUS SIGNS 
If at the time of birth or when a fresh undertaking is commenced, 
the Moon occupies the degree noted against each sign, it is 
auspicious, i.e., the native would do well, the Moon would have a 
good effect and the undertaking would succeed. 
Aries Moon in 21st degree 
Taurus 14th 
Gemini 18th „ 
Cancer 8th 
Leo 19th 
Virgo 9th „ 
Libra 24th „ 
Scorpio Hth 
Sagittarius 23rd 
Capricorn 14th „ 
Aquarius 19th 
Pisces 9th 
INAUSPICIOUS DEGREES FOR MOON TO OCCUPY 
It is inauspicious for the native if the Moon occupies the following 
degrees at birth. If the Moon occupies any of the following degrees, 
there will be illness or some other trouble at the age indicated 
by completed degrees. 
Aries 8 or 26 
Taurus 25 12 
Gemini 22 99 13 
Cancer 22 25 
Leo 24 
Virgo 11 
Libra 26 
Scorpio 23 99 14 
Sagittarius 18 13 
66 
Capricorn 20 „ 25 
Aquarius 20 „ 5 
Pisces 10 „ 12 
THE THREE SECTORS. 
The twelve signs from Aries to Pisces have been divided into 
three sectors : (i) Aries to Cancer is called the Sristhi Khanda ( 
Srishti means "creation" and Khanda means 'a portion, a divi- 
sion, a sector'); (ii) Leo to Scorpio comprise the Sthiti Khanda ( 
Sthiti means 'existence, stability, the state of being'); and (iii) 
Sagittarius to Pisces comprise Samhara Khanda (Samhara means ' 
destruction, annihilation'). In other words, Aries to Cancer repre- 
sent anabolic activity and Sagittarius to Pisces, the katabolic 
activity; in between Leo to Scorpio represent equilibrium. 
The junction degrees (i) between the fag end of Cancer and 
beginning of Leo, (ii) between the fag end of Scorpio and beginning 
of- Sagittarius, (iii) between the fag end of Pisces and beginning of 
Aries are called Khandanta or Gandanta. If a child is born 
when a Gandanta degree is rising (i.e., is on the ascending 
degree) or the Moon is therein at any of the junction points, 
this is inauspicious for the child's longevity or for his mother's. 
But if the child lives and reaches maturity, he will be extremely 
wealthy and illustrious. 
What is meant by the word fag end of a sign or commencing 
degrees? How many degrees are to be taken as comprising these? 
The convention is to take this as 3° 20' arc. Thus 26° 40' to 
30° 0' would be the fag end and 0 degree to 3° 20' would be 
the commencing degrees. In other words, one-ninth of a sign ( 
30° divided by 9 comes to 3° 20') is taken as the fag end or 
commencing degrees. 
CHAPTER 
THE PLANETS 
in hindu astrology cognisance is taken of nine planets, the Sun, 
Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu. 
The seven planets are the same as in western astrology. In fact, 
the Sun and the Moon are luminaries and the other live are planets, 
but for convenience of expression all the seven are referred to as 
planets. Rahu and Ketu are the special contribution by the 
Hindus to the principles and practice of astrology. 
As we have stated earlier when the Moon in his orbit round 
the earth goes to the northern latitude, the point where he crosses 
to the north is called Rahu. Conversely, when the. Moon in his 
orbit round the earth goes to the southern latitude, the point 
where he crosses to the south is called Ketu. These two points 
are ever receding in the ecliptic and in about nineteen years one 
complete circle of the zodiac is completed. Thus while the seven 
planets have generally a forward motion (except when the five- 
non-luminaries are retrograde) and proceed from Aries to Taurus, 
from Taurus to Gemini, and so on, Rahu and Ketu always move 
backward from Aries to Pisces, from Pisces to Aquarius, and so 
on. 
In Hindu scriptures there exist a large number of mythological 
stories about Rahu and Ketu who have been described as 
demons, in contrast to the Sun and the Moon, who are described 
as gods; but we are not concerned with them here. In astrology 
they are merely sensitive points, mathematically calculated and 
inserted in the birth chart. 
68 
In western astrology, Rahu is described as the north node of 
the Moon or Caput Draconis, and Ketu as the south node of the 
Moon or Cauda Draconis. But as Rahu and Ketu are shorter 
words, we shall use them throughout this book. 
The lordships of signs have already been given. 
EXALTATION AND DEBILITATION 
The signs of exaltation and debilitation of planets are as follows : 
Planet Sign of Sign of 
Exaltation Debilitation 
Sun Aries Libra 
Moon Taurus Scorpio 
Mars Capricorn Cancer 
Mercury Virgo Pisces 
Jupiter Cancer Capricorn 
Venus Pisces Virgo 
Saturn Libra Aries 
To explain the above, the entire sign Leo is owned by the Sun 
and if the Sun is in Leo, we say the Sun is strong because he is 
in his own sign. If the Sun is in Aries, we say that the Sun is in 
the sign of exaltation and therefore strong or that the Sun is 
exalted. But if the Sun is in Libra, the Sun is in his sign of debili- 
tation and therefore weak or the Sun is debilitated. 
Degree of Highest Exaltation and Deepest Debilitation 
The 10th degree of Aries is the highest exaltation degree of the 
Sun and the 10th degree of Libra, the degree of his deepest debi- 
litation. The 3rd degree of Taurus is the Moon's highest degree 
of exaltation and the 3rd degree of Scorpio his deepest debilita- 
tion point. The degrees are shown below in a tabular form. 
Planet Sign of Degree of Sign of Degree of 
Exaltation Highest Debilitation Deepest De- 
Exaltation bilitation 
Sun Aries 10° Libra 10° 
Moon Taurus 3' Scorpio 3° 
69 
Mars Capricorn 28° Cancer 28° 
Mercdry Virgo 15° Pisces 15° 
Jupiter:" Cancer 5o Capricorn 50 
Venus Pisces 27° Virgo 27° 
Saturn Libra 
O O Aries 
O © 
It is necessary to explain in this connection four Sanskrit 
terms as they will be found to occur often in this book and other 
texts dealing with Hindu astrology. 
AROHA. This means ascending. If a planet has crossed his dee- 
pest debilitation point and is proceeding towards his exaltation 
sign or highest exaltation point, during such a stage the planet 
is called Arohi. 
The locations of the planets when they are Arohi are as follows: 
(1) Sun from 11th degree Libra to 10° Aries. 
(2) Moon from 4th degree Scorpio to 3° Taurus. 
(3) Mars from 29th degree Cancer to 28° Capricorn. 
(4) Mercury from 16th degree Pisces to 15° Virgo. 
(5) Jupiter from 6th degree Capricorn to 5° Cancer. 
(6) Venus from 28th degree Virgo to 27° Pisces. 
(7) Saturn from 21st degree Aries to 20° Libra. 
Planets in Aroha are considered good. 
AVAROHA. When a planet has crossed his highest exaltation 
point and is proceeding towards his sign of debilitation or towards 
the deepest debilitation point, he is descending and is called in 
Avaroha or Avarohi. Thus the following are the sectors of the 
zodiac for each planet when he is in Avaroha: 
(1) Sun from 11th degree Aries to 10° Libra. 
(2) Moon from 4th degree of Taurus to 3° Scorpio. 
(3) Mars from 29th degree of Capricorn to 28° Cancer. 
(4) Mercury from 16th degree Virgo to 15° Pisces., 
(5) Jupiter from 6th degree of Cancer to 5° Capricorn. 
(6) Venus from 28th degree of Pisces to 27° Virgo. 
(7) Saturn from 21st degree Libra to 20° Aries. 
Planets in Avaroha are called A varohi and are not considered 
good. 
UCHCHABHILASHI. When a planet is in a sign immediately 
preceding the sign in which he would be exalted, he is called 
UchchabhilaMerc urydesiring to enter his sign of altation. hus 
the SunSn Pisces, the Moon in Aries, Mars in Sagittarius, Mer- 
70 
cury in Leo, Jupiter in Gemini, Venus in Aquarius and Saturn in 
Virgo will be respectively in their Uchchabhilashi signs. A planet 
in his Uchchabhhlashi sign is considered good, for though he has 
not entered his sign of exaltation yet he is on the threshold. 
neechabhilashi. When a planet is in a sign just preceding 
the sign in which he would be debilitated, he is called Neechab 
hilashi. This position is not so bad as when in the sign of debi- 
litation, yet it is considered unfavourable. Thus Sun in Virgo, 
Moon in Libra, Mars in Gemini, Mercury in Aquarius, Venus in 
Leo and Saturn in Pisces are Neechabhilarhi. Jupiter in Capricorn 
is in debilitation, the sign just preceding Capricorn is Sagit- 
tarius, but Jupiter in Sagittarius is not called Neechabhilashi 
because Sagittarius is his own sign and the goodness due to being 
in one's own sign far outweighs the disqualification of being in 
a sign preceding the sign of debilitation. 
One's own signs, or the signs of exaltation or debilitation of 
planets are the same in Hindu astrology as in the Western system. 
But the conception of the Moola-Trikona sign is peculiar to Hindu 
astrology, as explained below. 
moola-trikona. The Moola-Trikona signs for the various 
planets are as follows: 
(1) Sun — 0° to 20° in Leo. 
(2) Moon — 4° to 30° in Taurus. 
(3) Mars — 1° to 12° in Aries. 
(4) Mercury — 16° to 20° in Virgo. 
(5) Jupiter — 1° to 10° in Sagittarius. 
(6) Venus — 0° to 5° in Libra. 
(7) Saturn — 1° to 20° in Aquarius. 
(8) Rahu — Aquarius. 
(9) Ketu — Leo. 
A planet in his, Moola-Trikona is considered good and strong. 
He is in a better position than in his own sign. Thus, if the Sun 
is in Leo upto 20° he will be called in Moola-Trikona; while the 
Sun in 21° to 30° will be considered as being in his own sign. The 
Moon, if located in 0° to 3° of Taurus, is in exaltation, but if . 
he is anywhere from 4° to 30° in Taurus, he is in his Moola-Tri- 
kona sign. A planet in exaltation is stronger than a planet in 
Moola-Trikona; but as, stated earlier a planet in Moola-Trikona' 
is stronger and more benefic than when in his own sign. 
It will be observed that in discussing own signs or signs of 
71 
exaltation and debilitation, we have discussed these only in rela- 
tion to the seven planets, Sun to Saturn, and not Rahu and Ketu, 
because the ownership of the twelve signs is completed by the 
set of seven planets. Also in regard to co-ownership by Rahu or 
Ketu of signs or signs of exaltation and debilitation the various 
schools of Hindu astrology differ. We can briefly state the posi- 
tions as follows: 
1. Rahu in Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Scorpio and Aquarius is 
strong; and so also Ketu in Taurus, Virgo, latter half of 
Sagittarius and Pisces. 
2. Some consider Taurus as the exaltation sign of Rahu, while 
others take Gemini as his sign of exaltation. Ketu would 
thus be exalted in the seventh, i.e., Scorpio or Sagittarius. 
RELATIONSHIP 
Having dealt with their relationship with signs, we shall deal 
with the characteristics of each planet. 
Friendship, Neutrality and Enmity between Planets 
The following chart makes the natural relationships clear: 
Friends 
Moon 
Mars 
Jupiter 
Enemies 
Venus 
Saturn 
Sn Mars 
Mercury Jupiter 
Venus 
Saturn 
Mars Sun 
Moon 
Jupiter 
Mercury Sun 
Venus 
Mercury Venus 
Saturn* 
Moon Mars 
Jupiter 
Saturn 
72 
Jupiter Sun ' Mercury Saturn 
Moon Venus 
Mars 
Venus Mercury Sun Mars 
Saturn Moon Jupiter 
Saturn Mercury Sun Jupiter 
Venus Moon 
Mars 
Thus it will be seen that the relationship in all cases is not 
mutual. The Moon is a friend of the Sun and the Sun is a friend 
of the Moon. Here the relationship is mutual. Both are friends 
of each other. But the Sun is a friend of. Mercury, while Mercury 
is neutral to the Sun. Here the mutual relationship is not the 
same. One is a friend of the other, but the other is only neutral. 
This is the natural relationship or the relationship as applies to 
all the birth charts. 
Temporal Relationship 
There is another set of relationship which is special to a 
particular chart. This is called temporal relationship. Here 
there is no neutral. There are only friends or enemies. And the 
relationship is mutually the same. If A is a friend of B, B is 
also a friend of A or if A is an enemy of B, B is also an enemy 
of A. 
In this, the following rules determine friendship or enmity in 
temporal relationships: 
(1) Planets in the same sign are enemies. 
(2) Planets in signs which are fifth and ninth from each other 
are enemies. 
(3) Planets in signs which are sixth and eighth from each other 
are enemies. 
(4) Planets in signs which are seventh to each other are 
enemies. 
(5) Planets in signs second and twelfth from each other are 
friend. 
(6) Planets in signs third and eleventh from each other are 
friends. 
(7) Planets in signs fourth and tenth from each other are 
friends. 
73 
Rerultant Relationship 
The resultant relationship is based on two factors : (i) natural 
and (ii) temporal. 
(1) Friend in one and friend in the other is a great friend. 
(2) Friend in one and an enemy in the other is a neutral. 
(3) Neutral in one and a friend in the other is a friend. 
(4) Neutral in one and an enemy in the other is an enemy. 
(5) Enemy in one and an enemy in the other is a great enemy. 
For example, the Sun and the Moon are natural friends. If in 
a particular nativity the Sun is in Aries and the Moon in Sagit- 
tarius, they would temporarily be enemies. So natural friends at 
one place and temporal enemies at another would make them 
neutrals in regard to each other. Again, the Sun and Jupiter are 
natural friends. Suppose in a nativity the Sun is in Aries and 
Jupiter in Pisces. Being in second and twelfth signs (Sun in 
second to Jupiter and Jupiter in the twelfth from the Sun) they 
become temporal friends. So being natural friends and also tem- 
poral friends, they become great friends. 
PLANETARY ASPECTS 
We shall now pass on to another important matter, that of 
aspects. In Hindu astrology an aspect is counted from sign to 
sign. All planets have full aspect on the seventh sign as counted 
from the one tenanted by the planet. 
(1) A planet in any degree of Aries will fully aspect the 
seventh sign, i.e., Libra and so also any planet tenanting 
any degree of Libra. 
(2) All planets except Mars have 75% aspect on the signs 
which are fourth or eighth from the sign tenanted by the 
aspecting planet. Mars in such a case has full aspect. 
Thus, for example, a planet occupying any degree in Taums 
will have 75% aspect on Leo and Sagittarius, or on any 
planet tenanting any degree in Leo or Sagittarius. But if 
Mars is the aspecting planet and in Taurus from 1° to 30°, 
he will fully aspect Leo and Sagittarius and the planet 
anywhere therein. 
(3) All planets except Jupiter have 50% aspect on the signs 
which are fifth or ninth to the sign occupied by the aspect- 
ing planet. Jupiter in such a case has full aspect. Thus 
74 
Jupiter occupying any degree of Gemini will fully aspect 
Libra and Aquarius and the planets therein. But any 
planet other than Jupiter in Gemini will have only 50% 
aspect on Libra and Aquarius and planets occupying any 
degree of Libra or Aquarius. 
(4) All planets except Saturn have 25% aspect on the signs 
which are third and tenth from the sign tenanted by the 
aspecting planet. Thus, if the aspecting planet is in Cancer ( 
any degree—as degrees are not important because the count 
is made from sign to sign and not from degree to degree), he 
will have 25% aspect on Virgo and Aries and on planets 
tenanting Virgo or Aries. But Saturn in such a case will 
have full aspect, i.e., Saturn in Cancer will fully aspect 
Virgo and Aries and all planets situated therein. All this 
can be summarised thus 
Aspecting on 7th on 4th on 5th on 3rd 
Planet Sign & 8th & 9th &10th 
Signs Signs Signs 
Sun 100% 75% 50% 25% 
Moon 100% 75% 50% 25% 
Mars 100% 100% 50% 25% 
Mercury 100% 75% 50% 25% 
Jupiter 100% 75% 100% 25% 
Venus 100% 75% 50% 25% 
Saturn 100% 75% 50% 100% 
Planets have no aspect on signs which are second, sixth, 
eleventh or twelfth as counted from the sign occupied by the 
aspecting planet. Planets in the same sign do not aspect each 
other. In Western astrology, conjunction is also one of the aspects, 
but in Hindu astrology conjunction generates effects due to being 
together, but it is not treated as an aspect. 
Rahu and Ketu do not aspect nor are they aspected. But sup- 
pose Rahu or Ketu is in a particular sign and that sign is aspected 
bArpecting; then due to the quality of the sign being beneficially 
improSignruSignrJupiter's aspect, the quality of Rahu or Ketu is 
also automatically improved and we say that Rahu or Ketu is 
aspected by a benefic. But strictly speaking Rahu and Ketu are 
75 
affected by conjunction of benefics or malefics and do not come 
in the realm of aspects. 
It must be emphasised that one great difference between the 
Western and the Hindu systems in computing the aspect is 
that in the Western system the count is made from degree 
to degree, but in the Hindu system the count is made from sign 
to sign. 
Another important difference is that in the Western system the 
aspect will be mutually the same. Thus if, say, Mars and Jupiter 
are in trine we can express this by saying Mars Trine Jupiter or 
Jupiter Trine Mars. But in Hindu astrology, if Jupiter is in say 
Aries and Mars in Leo, then Jupiter will have full aspect on Mars, 
but Mars will have only 50% aspect on Jupiter. 
The third difference between the Western and the Hindu 
systems is that in the former certain types of aspects, e.g., sextile 
or trine are good and certain aspects like square and opposition 
are evil, but in Hindu system there is no such classification. 
In the Hindu system : 
(1) Aspects by benefics are always good. 
(2) Aspects by malefics are always evil. 
(3) Whether a benefic or a malefic if he aspects his own house, 
he strengthens it and does not harm it. 
This is the general principle. But along with this there is also 
the following special principle: 
(1) Aspects of lords of good houses such as fifth and ninth 
are good. 
(2) Aspects of lords of evil houses such as sixth, eighth or 
twelfth are evil. 
Having discussed the quality and the quantity of aspects we 
shall pass on to other characteristics of the planets. 
THE CHARACTERISTICS AND PORTFOLIOS 
OF PLANETS 
In a nativity the Sun represents the soul of the native; the 
moon, the heart (the emotional mind is referred to as heart; also 
the physical organ, heart); Mars, stamina—physical as well as 
mental; Mercury, speech; Jupiter, happiness and knowledge; 
Venus, pleasures (comforts, as well as pleasure of sex); Saturn, 
sorrow. 
76 
If a planet is strong in the birth chart, he increases the good 
effects. A strong Sun would give a strong soul. But in case of 
Saturn it is the opposite : a strong Saturn will lessen sorrow or 
grief but a weak Saturn would make the native suffer much grief. 
Ingredientr of the Body. Sun—bones; Moon—blood and flesh; 
Mars—marrow; Mercury—skin; Jupiter—fat; Venus—semen; Sa- 
turn—nerves. 
These facts are helpful to determine the cause of disease and 
death according to the planets afflicted and whose Darha and 
Antardarha are current. 
The Sun is the king, the Moon is the queen, Mercury is 
the prince, Jupiter and Venus are the Ministers, Mars is the com- 
mander-in-chief and Saturn is the servant. 
In Hindu mythology, Jupiter is described as the religious pre- 
ceptor of gods, while Venus is the religious preceptor of the 
demons. This distinction indicates that if Jupiter is strong in a 
nativity, the native would be good, learned, religious, will be 
inclined to charity and benevolence; he will be rich and his acts 
and deeds will be godly and for the good of others. But if Venus 
is strong, the native will have comforts which give pleasure to 
the senses, luxuries, erotic pleasures, etc. According to Hindu 
philosophy the earthly pleasures take a man away from the 
path of God and so worldly enjoyments have been allotted to 
the portfolio of Venus who has been described on this principle 
as the preceptor of the demons. 
Complexion 
The following are the complexions of planets : Sun—dark red; 
Moon—very fair; Mars—pinkish fair; Mercury—grass green; 
Jupiter—pale yellowish fair; Venus—very fair; Saturn—dark; 
Rahu—black; Ketu—variegated colour. Moon or Venus if in the 
ascendant makes one fair; in the seventh house they—or one of 
them—give a fair and a beautiful wife. The purpose of describing 
the complexion of the planets is this : if a planet is strong in a 
nativity, it endowes the native with his complexion, and particu- 
larly so if he is in the ascendant or if he aspects the ascendant 
or if he is the strongest planet in the chart. 
In horary astrology, the complexion of the planet is also made 
use of for finding the complexion of a thief and thus identifying 
him. 
77 
Some Physical Characteristicr 
Sun. Square shaped, honey-eyed, scanty hair on head, illustri* 
ous, of good appearance. 
Moon. Young, slender and globular body, well shaped limbs, 
intelligent, good, eyes, soft spoken, fond of walking or travelling, 
having good discrimination, fine (thin) curly hair, fond of middle 
aged women. 
Mars. Cruel glance, young, not very tall, fond of self-praise, 
inpatient, restless, thin waist, fond of sports (shooting), courage- 
ous, commanding influence, sexy. 
Mercury. Diplomatic speech or habit of speaking with double 
meaning; clear pronunciation, spare and thin body, humorous, 
fond of fun, learned, clever, veins prominent, imitates others in 
speech and dress. 
Jupiter. Big and fat body, prominent belly, brownish eyes and 
hair, benevolent eyes,, very wise, having the voice of a lion, well 
up in various branches of learning. 
Venur. Handsome in appearance, long arms, large thighs, 
chest and face, having much semen, dark curly and long hair, 
fond of dress of variegated colour, intelligent, fond of dalliance, 
big eyes, sexy, wealthy may have come defect in eyes. 
Saturn. Indolent or lazy, long and thin body, big or defective 
teeth, rough hair on body and head, may have hair on the lower 
part of the ears, lam% hard limbs, inclined to do evil. 
This is the appearance of Saturn, if weak. If Saturn be strong 
the native would be sober, deep, sagacious, fond of mystic and 
occult sciences, philosophy, etc. Rahu is like Saturn. Ketu is like 
Mars. 
Temperament 
The Sun is of fixed or steady temperament; the Moon is fickle; 
Mars is violent; Mercury has mixed qualities but is generally 
volatile; Jupiter is mild and soft hearted; Venus is easy going 
and accommodating; Saturn is harsh, hard-hearted and cruel. 
Glance 
The Sun and Mars glance upwards; Mercury and Venus 
side-ways (like a flirting damsel). The Moon and Jupiter glance 
squarely in front, while Saturn and Rahu look with downcast 
eyes. 
78 
Purpore 
When the ascendant is on the border line, one may by tenancy 
of a particular planet in the ascendant fix the rising sign; or in 
horary astrology, the planet in the ascendant may describe the 
person from whom gain may be expected. 
Flavour 
Sun—bitter; Moon—saltish; Mars—pungent; Mercury—mixed 
with several tastes; Jupiter—sweet; Venus—sour; Saturn— 
astringent. 
Humours of the Body 
According to the Hindu science of medicine all bodily humours 
have been classified into three categories (i) Vata (wind), (ii) 
Pitta (bile), and (iii) Kapha (phlegm). All diseases or ailments in 
the body arise out of the imbalance of one, two or all the three 
humours. They have been allotted to the seven planets as follows : 
Sun—bile; Moon—wind and phlegm; Mars--bile; Mercury—wind, 
bile and phlegm; Jupiter—phlegm; Venus—wind and phlegm; 
Saturn—wind. 
Gunas: Satwika, Rajasika and Tamasika 
These are the three qualities which sum up thoughts, deeds 
and inclinations. Those who are Satwika have pure thoughts and 
are inclined to acts of religious merit. Those who are Rajarika are 
fond of the pleasures of the senses, decoration, fond of money 
and a gay life. Those who are Tamarika are greedy, lustful, of 
angry temperament and intent upon harming others. 
The Sun, Moon and Jupiter are Satwika, Mercury and Venus 
are Rajarika, Mars and Saturn are Tamasika. 
Colours 
The colour of the articles or commodities over which each of 
the planets presides are as follows : Sun—copper coloured; 
Moon—white; Mars—deep red; Mercury—green; Jupiter—yellow; 
Venus—of variegated colours; Saturn—black. 
If the planet is strong, gain of commodities of above mentioned 
colour, but if the planet be weak, loss of or through articles of 
this colour. This is useful in horary astrology to ascertain the 
colour of things lost or to be gained. 
79 
Age 
Mars—child; Mercury—boy; Venus—of 16 years; Jupiter—a 
man ,aged 30 years. The Sun is a person 50 years old; the Moon 
of 70 years; Saturn, Rahu and Ketu very old or 100 years Old. 
This is useful to ascertain the effects of planets. A strong 
Saturn will indicate wealth and position in old age. A strong 
Jupiter .shows good effect generally after middle age. This prin- 
ciple is recognised in the Western system also. Alan Leo in one 
of his books states that Jupiter generally, shows its good effect 
after middle age—after the age of 40. In colder climates, the 
longevity is greater, so he has put middle age at 40. 
According to largely practised usage, which is not of Hindu 
origin but imported from the Middle East, and followed by a large 
number of Hindu astrologers in the north-western part of India, 
the age is as follows : 
(1) Influence of Moon: from birth to 4 years of age, 
(2) Mercury.: from 5th year to 14th year, 
(3) Venus : from 15th to 22nd year of age, 
(4) Sun : from 23rd year to 41st year of age, 
(5) Mars : 42nd year to 56th year of age, 
(6) Jupiter : 57th year to 68th year of age, 
(7) Saturn : 69th year to 108th year of age. 
These durations are according to the planetary periods and 
their distances. However, we are not concerned here with the 
astronomical basis. A rough and ready way to judge a birth chart 
on the above basis is as follows. Suppose the Sun in a chart is 
weak, and ill placed and Mars well placed and strong and the 
native who comes to an astrologer is aged about 40. On this basis 
the astrologer would predict that unfortunate conditions of affairs 
would continue till the age 41 and from the 42nd to the 56th 
year will be a good period. 
According to another astrological usage, the following are the 
significant years of each planet : Sun 22, Moon 24, Mars 28, 
Mercury 32, Jupiter 16, Venus 25, Saturn 36, Rahu 48, Ketu 48. If 
the planet is strong and favourable, good results can be predicted 
pertaining to the house he is lord of or tenants in that year of age. 
Metalr 
Sun—copper; Moon—silver; Mars—copper, gold; Mercury— 
alloy of metals; Jupiter—gold; Venus—silver; Saturn—lead, iron. 
80 
Jewels 
Sun—ruby; Moon—pearl; Mars—coral; Mercury—emerald; 
Jupiter—topaz; Venus—diamond; Saturn—sapphire; Rabu- 
gomed (a precious stone of the colour of garnet); Ketu—cat's eye. 
If the native is under the unfavourable influence of a planet be 
should wear the jewel governed by the planet. The evil influence 
is thus mitigated. Generally the precious stone is wrapped in a 
silk strip of the same colour as the stone and tied round the arm 
for a trial period of three days. If it shows a bad effect, it is 
removed at once. If it shows a good effect, it is studded in a ring 
or pendant with the underside uncovered, so that it is in direct con- 
tact with the skin. The upper surface is also left open to catch 
the light rays. 
Seasonr 
The Hindu year is divided into six seasons of two months each, 
beginning from Spring, (i) Spring—Venus, (ii) Summer—Sun and 
Mars, (iii) Rains—Moon, (iv) Autumn—Mercury, (v) Winter- 
Jupiter, (vi) Severe Winter—Saturn. 
Places 
Sun—temple; Moon—tanks, rivers, seas; Mars-kitchens, cre- 
mation grounds, where fire is lit (in modern context, factories 
where fire and electricity are used); Mercury—places for sports, 
gardens (in modern context, playgrounds, polo-grounds, race 
courses, clubs); Jupiter—treasuries (in modem context, banks, 
vaults); Venus—places of pleasure, bedrooms, cinema houses, 
restaurants; Saturn—where remnants of food are thrown away (in 
modern context, where low class labour reside or work), burial 
grounds, gutters, unclean places, forsaken places, etc. 
Another classification is as follows : The Moon and Venus 
reside in water or near water or aquatic regions; Mercury and 
Jupiter in villages where learned men live; the Sun, Mars, Saturn 
and Rahu reside in forests and mountains. 
Sex 
The Sun, Mars and Jupiter are masculine. The Moon and 
Venus are feminine, satum is a male eunuch, Mercury's a female 
eunuch. 
To determine the sex of children and to find out whether more 
81 
boys or girls would be born remember that Mercury and Saturn 
indicate female children', for very few eunuchs are born. 
Relationships r. 
Sun determines father, Mars brothers, Jupiter sons. Moon 
mother, Venus wife. Mercury maternal uncle. Saturn servants. 
Deities 
Here are the names of Hindu gods who preside over each 
planet. 
Sun—Fire and Rudra; Moon—Goddess Durga; Mars—Subrah- 
manya, Hanuman; Mercury—Vishnu; Jupiter—Indra; Venus- 
Shachi (consort of Indra); Saturn—Brahma; Rahu—Shesha (the 
celestial python). 
Elements 
According to Hindu philosophy the entire creation consists of 
five elements—Prithvi (earth), water, fire, air, and ether. 
Sun—fire; Moon—water; Mars—fire; Mercury—earth; Jupi- 
ter—ether; Venus— water; Saturn—air. 
Directions 
The planets respectively preside over the directions noted against 
each of them. East—Sun; South-East—Venus; South—Mars; 
South-West—Rahu; West—Saturn; North-West—Moon; North- 
Mercury; North-East—Jupiter. 
The above information is for the determination of loss or gain 
from a particular direction during Mahadasha or Antardasha of 
the planet according as he is strong or weak. 
Caste 
Jupiter and Venus are Brahmanas (priestly class); the Sun and 
Mars are Kshatriyas (warrior class); the Moon is Vaishya (trading 
class); Mercury is Shudra (serving class); Saturn is the serving 
class of mixed caste. According to others, the Moon and Mercury 
are Vaishyas (trading class). Saturn is Shudra (serving class), 
Rahu and Ketu are wild tribes or Mlechchas (non-Hindus). 
This is used to determine the caste of an enemy or of the person 
from whom the native is likely to benefit or through whom lose 
money, or to find the caste of the thief in horary astrology. 
A.-6 
82 
Cloth 
Sun—thick cloth; Moon—new unused cloth; Mars—cloth, a 
fringe of which has been burnt away by fire; Mercury—cloth, a 
portion of which is wet; Jupiter—cloth neither new nor old; 
Venus—strong, decorated or embroidered cloth; Saturn—old and 
torn woollen cloth. 
The quality of cloth would vary according to the strength of the 
planet. For example, if Saturn is very strong it may indicate a 
good blanket or black velvet. 
Biped, Quadruped, etc. 
Jupiter and Venus are bipeds; Mars and Sun are quadrupeds; 
Moon is a crawling insect; and Saturnare birds. 
Riring with Front 
The Moon. Mercury and Venus rise with the head first; the 
Sun, Mars, Saturn and Rahu with their hind parts first; Jupiter 
both ways. 
Dhatu, Moola, Jeeva 
It has been told already that in Hindu astrology all articles are 
divided into three categories : (i) inanimate matter—minerals, me- 
tals, etc., are covered by the term Dhatu; (ii) plants, trees, grass, 
creepers are covered by the term Moola; (Hi) animate creation 
down from an insect to humans are called Jeeva (with life). 
The Sun and Mars preside over Dhatus. The Moon and Saturn 
have sway over Moola, while Jupiter and Venus represent Jeeva, 
Mercury has a mixed portfolio of all the three. 
This information is useful to indicate the source of gain or 
loss of Dhatu, Moola or Jeeva, according to the planet in the 
chart. 
Directional Strength 
Mercury and Jupiter are strong in the first house or ascendant 
of a chart; Moon and Venus in the fourth house; Saturn in the 
seventh, and Sun and Mars in tenth. 
Shubha and Papa 
Shubha means auspicious or benefic; Papa literally means sin- 
ful, but in the astrological context, it means extremely harmful 
83 
and detrimental to the house a Papa tenants or aspects. 
Mercury if conjoined with a Papa acts as a Papa; if conjoined 
with a Shubha he acts as a Shubha, if conjoined with both types 
of planets, he shows mixed results. Mercury is the most mutable 
of planets and most naturally imbibes the quality of the planet 
he conjoins. If not conjoined with a planet he is a Shubha. 
Jupiter and Venus are Shubhas (natural); Mars. Saturn, Rahu 
and Ketu are Papar (natural). 
The Sun if exalted or in own sign is a Krum (cruel) but 
not a Papa; otherwise he is a Papa. But he has a very light 
shade of Papa: one school would prefer to call him a Krum and 
not a Papa. 
The Moon is a natural Shubha but on the fourteenth and 
fifteenth days of the dark fortnight he is very weak and is tech- 
nically called Ksheenachandra. To explain this in terms of longi- 
tudes, when the Moon is applying to the Sun and the distance 
between the Moon and the Sun is 24° or less, the Moon is deemed 
a Papa. 
The Moon has in the above circumstances been termed a Papa 
not so much because he himself is a Papa but because when 
he is in the above sector (applying and within 24°), all planets 
do not bestow auspicious effects. 
The following are Papa in increasing measure : Ksheena Moon, 
Sun, Mars, and Saturn. Ketu has to be bracketed with Mars and 
Rahu with Saturn. 
The Shubhas in increasing order are Venus, Mercury conjoined 
with Shubha (and not conjoined with any Papa), Jupiter. 
Manner of Winning Over 
In Hindu polity there arc four methods of winning over a 
recalcitrant, refractory person or an enemy. 
Sama By mild approach, request, appeal to reason, 
(Good Counsel) good counsel. 
Danda By punishing or threat of punishing or by 
(Punishment) using physical force or show of physical 
force. 
Dana (Temptation) By offering monetary or other incentive. 
Bheda (Tact) By tact and diplomacy; by employing spies 
or secret propaganda. 
84 
Jupiter and Venus preside over Sama; the Moon over Dana; the 
Sun and Mars over Danda; Mercury and Saturn over Bheda. 
Thus, a man may be brought round by methods and manner in- 
dicated above depending on the planets. 
Geographical Regions of India 
Sin Kalinga. 
Moon Yavana. 
Mars from Ceylon to Krishna river also Avanti. 
Mercury from Windhyas to Ganges also Magadha. 
Jupiter from Gautamika to Vindhyas also Sindha. 
Venus from Krishna to Gautamika. 
Saturn from Ganges tq Himalayas. 
Rahu Amhara. 
Kan Parvata. 
KARAKA 
The word Karaka literally means that which does. In the present 
astrological context it means the matters for which a particular 
planet is a significator for. While judging the birth chart, besides 
the house and the house lord which governs a particular matter the 
Karaka is also to be taken into consideration. We give below 
the several special matters which fall in the portfolio of each 
planet. 
Sun. Soul, self, self-realisation, influence, prestige, power, 
valour, health, eye, general well being, heat, splendour, father, 
king, royalty, royal favour. 
Moon. The heart, understanding, inclinations, emotions, sleep, 
happiness, good name and fame, facial lustre, mother, royal 
favour, affluence (wealth), travel, water reservoirs. 
Mars. Stamina, special qualities, such as courage, desire, 
anger, scandal, diseases, enemies, opposition, controversies, 
weapons, commander of an army, land, immovable properties, 
younger brother, relations such as agnate or cognate cousins. 
Mercury. Intelligence, discrimination, speech, expression, 
education, learning, mathematics, logic, astrology, medical know- 
ledge and profession, writing, publishing, acting as a middle man 
in trade or politics, dancing, drama, mixture of things, leafy trees, 
85 
testing of precious stones, charms (amulets), maternal uncles, 
friends. 
Jupiter. Wisdom, learning, corpulence or fatness of body, acts 
of religious merit, devotion to gods, manes and superior persons, 
holy places, scriptures, proficiency in learning, philosophy, giving 
alms or donations, benevolence, wealth, respect, sons, religious 
preceptors, fruit, fruit trees. In female nativities, Jupiter is a 
Karaka for husband, also. 
Venus. Wife, marriage, sexual matters, pleasures of the 
senses (so in a female nativity Venus may be a co-Karaka along 
with Jupiter for the husband), singing, poetry, scents, ornaments, 
jewellery, all articles of luxury, cooperation from and with others, 
flowers, flowering trees, beauty, buying and selling, cows, watery 
places. 
Saturn. Longevity, life, death, adversity, calamities, disres- 
pect, diseases, poverty, livelihood, servility, unrighteous conduct, 
learning of foreign languages and sciences, agricultural pursuits, 
minerals, oils, things buried deep into the earth and coming out 
therefrom, maid servants, servants, service, theft, cruel deeds, 
malice, lameness, very old persons. 
Rahu. Paternal grand father, fallacious argument, harsh speech, 
gambling, movement, travelling, outcastes, foreigners, Mlechchas ( 
non-Hindus), snake, snake bite, theft, wickedness, widow, in- 
trigue with a widow, skin diseases, itches, eczema, acute or sharp 
pain in the body, hiccoughs, swelling in the body or any part 
thereof. 
Ketu. Maternal grand father, consumption, pain, fever, wound, 
witchcraft, causing trouble to enemies, horned animals, dog, cock, 
birds with spots or of variegated colour, philosophy, salvation. 
There is all() another rule which is as follows : 
As already explained, planets are Karakas for certain relations 
also. The Sun for father, Moon for mother, Mars for brothers ( 
according to one school, Mars for younger brothers, Jupiter for 
elder brothers), Mercury for friends, maternal uncle and for adopted 
son, Jupiter for sons, elder brothers, gurus, (religious preceptors), 
and in female nativities for husband, Venus for wife, Saturn for 
servants, and longevity, Rahu for paternal grandfather; Ketu for 
maternal grandfather. 
According to one school, if the birth or conception be during 
the day, the Sun is Karaka for father, Venus for mother, Saturn 
86 
for uncle, (father's brother), Moon for mother's sister. If the 
birth or conception be during the night, Saturn for father, Sun for 
uncle (father's brother), Moon for mother, Venus for mother's 
sister. 
It is good to have the Sun and Saturn Karakas for the above 
in odd signs. Similarly it is good for the Karakar—the Moon and 
Venus to be in even signs. Some astrologers interpret diurnal 
birth as birth during the day, in a diurnal sign and odd sign; 
and a nocturnal birth as birth during night; in a nocturnal and 
even sign. 
Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Aquarius and Pisces are diurnal 
signs, while Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Saggittarius 
and Capricorn are nocturnal. 
If the significators for male relations, i.e., the Sun and Saturn, 
be in even signs and even Navanshas* the native will be 
antagonistic to his father or uncle, according to the significator. 
Similarly, if the Moon and Venus be in odd signs and odd 
Navanshar, the native would be antagonistic to his mother or the 
mother's sister, according to the significator. 
If the above maxim applies and if this Yoga is formed in a male 
nativity having a Papa in the ascendant and the lord of the 
seventh (from which we judge sexual intercourse) is strong, then 
there is sexual (illicit) intercourse with a relation of- the opposite 
sex. 
If the lord of the house governing sisters be conjoined with the 
Moon and Venus, the native has illicit connection with his sister 
or some such relation. If the lord of the fifth house be so conjoined, 
with a daughter or some such relation and if the ninth lord be so 
conjoined, with maternal uncle's wife and so on. 
If in a female nativity if the planet is conjoined with the lord of 
the fifth house then cohabitation with son or some one closely rela- 
ted like a son is indicated; if conjoined with the lord of ninth then 
with maternal uncle and so on. If in a female nativity the lord of 
the third' house (governing brother) be conjoined with Sun 
and Saturn, the female cohabits with her brother or some such 
close relation. In this manner the person with whom illicit 
cohabitation takes place has to be determined according to the 
planet (the houses he rules) conjoined with Moon and Venus if 
in a male nativity, and Sun and Saturn in a female nativity. 
But the following ingredients must be present : 
One .ninth division of a sign. Odd signs begin with odd Navansha. 
87 
(a) In male nativities, the ingredients are the placement of the 
Moon and Venus in odd signs and odd Navanrhar, 
In female nativities placement of the Sun and Saturn in even 
signs and even navanrhas, 
(b) Papa in Lagna(ascendant). 
(c) Lord of seventh strong. 
(d) Conjunction with Sun and Saturn of the lord of a parti- 
cular house (signifying the relationship of the person) in a female 
nativity. 
(e) Conjunction with Moon and Venus, of the lord of a partic 
ular house (to denote the illicit relationship) in a male nativity. 
We have explained the above to indicate how conclusions are 
drawn on the basis of significators. This discussion is more 
with a view to provide a glimpse of the receding horizon of 
astrology and not for judgment by beginners. 
Planets as Karakas for Houres 
Besides the planets there are Karakarfov certain houses also. 
The second sense in which the word is used in is as significator 
for a particular house. Below are given the names of houses and 
the planets which are respectively significators for them. 
I House. Sun 
II JupiteDeepik ■ 
[I „ Mars 
V „ Moon and 
Mercury 
V " Jupiter 
J\ Mars and 
Saturn 
VII House Venus 
The above is the view expressed in Phala Deepika, Sarvartha 
Chintamani, jataka, Parijataand several other standard works. 
But Parashar who may be described as the father of Hindu 
astrology, confines the Karaka qualities for the fourth house to 
the Moon, that of the sixth of Mars, that of the ninth to Jupiter, 
and of the tenth to Mercury. The Karakas for the fourth, sixth, 
ninth and tenth houses will be as given below : 
88 
IY House 
VI 
IX 
X 
Moon 
Mars 
Jupiter 
Mercury 
Thus Parashar recognises only one Karaka for each house. In 
regard to other houses there is an identity of views. 
In giving the above outline of Karakas of each planet, we can- 
not claim that we have been exhaustive. In this world there are 
thousands of things and one or the other planet (or one or more 
planets jointly) would be Karaka for each such item and 
many a thousand things must fall in the portfolio of each 
planet. But in a book of this nature, intended for beginners, it 
would be unwise to load it with too many facts. To give a 
broad idea, in judging a house or a particular matter governed 
by a house, we have not only to look at the house and the 
house lord, but to the Karaka also. For example, in a male 
nativity, if we have to arrive at a judgment in regard to his 
wife, we must not only look up the seventh house and its lord 
but also the significator for wife (Venus). Venus may or may 
not be connected with the seventh house or its lord, but one has, 
by virtue of the inherent right and significance of Venus, to 
determine from him also the matters connected with wife. 
Similarly, if we have to arrive at certain conclusions in regard to 
son or sons in a particular nativity, we have not only to examine 
the fifth house and its lord including the planets associated with 
or aspecting the fifth house and its lord but also Jupiter. 
Before concluding this chapter, we would like to emphasise one 
important point. No planet is always good. No planet is always 
evil. In some nativities, a strong and well placed Jupiter may 
give the native wisdom, wealth, sons, and a highly religious con- 
duct; but in another he may cause severe phlegmatic diseases and 
death. Often in one and the same nativity a planet is good for 
certain purposes and evil for others. Venus in seventh may give 
the native a very charming wife, but if aspected by malefics she 
may be flirtatious. Mercury may make one a good public speaker 
and author, but, if afflicted may cause some nervous disease or 
mental derangement. So we should not run away with the idea 
that any planet is wholly good or wholly evil. 
Besides, one and the same planet may show different effects 
89 
according to its placement and associations. Mercury if weak may 
cause the native to indulge in vulgar and foolish jokes; but if the 
planet is dignified or well aspected, it may produce a rare dra- 
matist With a subtle sense of humour. An afflicted Mars makes 
one quarrelsome, prone to indulge in quarrels with little pro- 
vocation or no provocation at all, while a strong and dignified 
Mars may make one a courageous general. Mars and Mercury 
if both unfavourable might make one a forger or a cheat— 
Mercury contributing cleverness and Mars endowing the person 
with stamina, for even acts of dishonesty, theft, burglary; cheating, 
smuggling, etc., require stamina and cleverness. The same Mars 
and Mercury if strong, well placed and well aspected, may 
endow a general of an army with strategic superiority and 
logistics. Saturn may produce a mendicant, a shabby beggar or 
a yogi of high order. To repeat; one and the same planet may 
behave differently though the same streak will be found to run 
through its effect. Besides a planet cannot act in an isolated 
manner,' insulated completely from the general effects of the 
nativity, the individual influences generated by other planets and 
the background of the native. 
People educated and belonging to cultured society will not 
quarrel in the same manner as two vendors in a fish-market, nor 
will a poor man's inclination towards benevolence and charity 
find the same expression as similar intentions of a multi-million- 
aire. While delineating the effects or significance of planets, these 
basic considerations must not be lost sight of. 
PAPAS OR PAPI PLANETS 
Papa is a noun and the word Papi is an adjective derived from 
it. Papa in Sanskrit means a 'sin' and the word Papi means 'sin- 
ful'. However, in astrology Papi has acquired a particular con- 
notation. There is no single word in English which would convey 
the idea of Papi'. The word Saumya' can be translated as benefic 
and 'Krura' is generally expressed as malefic. We have already 
explained that the Sun, Moon (on the fourteenth and fifteenth 
day of the dark fortnight), Mercury conjoined with Mars, Saturn, 
Rahu or Ketu and Mars, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu are malefics. 
Moon (except on days already stated), Mercury—not conjoined 
with Mars, Saturn, Rahu or Ketu-Jupiter and Venus are called 
90 
benefits or Shubha. Mars, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu are in 
addition to their classification as malefics are also called Papir. 
According to one school the Sun is Krura (a malefic) but not a 
Papi. This is one sense in which the word Papi is used. Another 
sense in which the word Papi is used is in relation to owning the 
third, sixth or the eleventh house, i.e., the third, sixth or the 
eleventh sign as counted from the rising sign. Thus a natural 
benefit like Jupiter can become a Papi due to ownership of the 
third and sixth or eleventh house. For example, for Libra or 
Aquarius ascendants Jupiter becomes a Papi due to ownership 
of third and sixth, for Libra and for Aquarius due to 
ownership of the eleventh. 
Similarly, a natural Papi can become a Shubha, i.e., auspicious, 
by owning the fifth and ninth houses. Thus for Cancer ascendant, 
Mars owns the fifth and tenth and becomes a Shubha and for 
Taurus ascendant, Saturn owns the ninth and tenth and 
becomes a Shubha. The word 'Paid is used in two senses, (i) to 
indicate natural Papa tendencies; (ii) to indicate the quality 
arising out of or due to ownership of a particular house in a 
particular nativity. In the first sense, due to natural propensities, 
the quality is fixed and immutable, whUe in the second sense, it is 
a temporal quality which is mutable and changes from nativity to 
nativity according to the sign rising. 
The Papa qualities of the third, sixth, eleventh and eighth houses 
are in the following proportion 
Lord of third 1 unit 
Lord of sixth 2 units 
Lord of eleventh 3 units 
Lord of eighth 6 units 
Thus the lord of the sixth is more Pap! than the lord of the 
third. The lord of the eleventh is more Papi than the lord of the 
sixth, and the lord of the eighth is the most Papi. 
CHAPTER 
HOUSES 
WHAT ARE houses? Every one knows what a house is. But in 
astrology house has a special meaning. Generally in Hindu 
astrology, as explained earlier in Chapter 2, if Aries is the sign 
ascending, Aries is the first house, Taurus constitutes the second 
house, Gemini the third, and so ,on; Pisces constituting the 
twelfth house. If Taurus is the sign ascending, Taurus will be 
the first house, Gemini the second, Cancer the third, and Aries 
the twelfth. 
The sign ascending is the first house and any planet therein 
is deemed to be in the first house. The sign next to the ascendant 
sign will constitute the second house and any planet therein 
will be deemed to be in the second house. This is the principle 
the old Hindu astrologers followed. The sign and the house were, 
deemed synonymous. All the Yogas given in ancient Hindu 
astrological texts are based on this principle. The aspects 
between planets are also on this basis. So for beginners we 
suggest that they skip over the subsequent paragraphs dealing 
with house division. The more serious students of astrology are, 
however, advised to study what follows. 
In Western astrology there are various methods of house divi- 
sion—the Placidian, Campanain or those followed by Porphyry or 
Regiomontanus. For the last one thousand years or more, due 
to contacts with Western and Middle Eastern systems of astrology, 
the method known as Porphyry's system has been in vogue in 
92 
India and has become enshrined in Indian texts. This consists of 
calculating the degree at the meridian and the difference between 
the meridian degree and the ascendant (ascending degree) is 
trisected and the cusps of the eleventh and twelfth houses fixed 
on this basis. Hindu astrologers have now been claiming this 
as the Hindu method of house division. But this is not so. This 
is an imported* system and not an indigenous one. 
The original Hindu method is what is known as the equal 
house division: Parashar, Jaimini, Mantreshwar, all followed this 
method. According to this method if the cusps of the 1st house 
is 1-22° 2' 39" (or in Scorpio), the cusps of the other houses will be 
as follows: 
For each house go on adding one full sign, the degrees 
remaining the same. 
S D M S* 
The cusp of the II House 8 22° 2' 39" 
in 9 22° 2' 39" 
IV 10 22° 2' 39" 
V 11 22° 2' 39" 
VI 0 22° 2' 39" 
VII 1 22° 2' 39" 
VIII 2 22° 2' 39" 
IX 3 22° 2' 39" 
X 4 22° 2' 39" 
XI 5 22° 2' 39" 
XII 6 22° 2' 39" 
A house extends to 15° on either side. Thus adding 15' 
-= 
o 
n 
cusp of the first we get: 
M 
• 
S D S 
7 22° 2' 39" 
0 15° 0' 0" 
CO 
^10 2' 39" 
This is the junction point 'where the first house ends and the 
second hoilse commences. 
* S means completed signs, D indicates completed degree and M means 
complete minutes of arc. The last S means seconds of arc. 
93 
By adding one sign to the junction point we get the following : 
S D M 
Junction point between 
I and II 8 7° 2' 39 
II and III 9 7° 2' 39 
III and IV 10 7° 2' 39 
IY and V 11 7° 2' 39 
Y and VI 0 7° 2' 39 
VI and VII 1 7° 2' 39 
VII and VIII 2 7° 2' 39 
VIII and IX 3 7° 2' 39 
IX and X 4 7° 2' 39 
X and XI 5 7° 2' 39 
XI and XII 6 7° 2' 39 
XII and I 7 7° 2' 39 
So the twelfth house ends with 7-7° 2' 39" or the first house 
commences here. The first house ends at 8-7° 2' 39" where the 
second house commences. 
Thus the domains of the twelve houses would be as follows: 
First House from S 
s DM SDM 
First House from 7 7° 2' 
v© 
© CO 7° 2' 39 
Second DI MI 8 7° 2' 39" „ 9 7° 2' 39 
Third 99 OP 9 7° 2' 39" „ 10 7° 2' 39 
Fourth n n 10 7° 2' 39" „ 11 7° 2' 39 
Fifth to *9 11 7° 2' 39" „ 0 7° 2' 39 
Sixth IP, ti 0 7° 2' 39" „ 1 7° 2' 39 
Seventh Of 1 7° 2' 39" „ 2 7° 2' 39 
Eighth 91 Qf 2 7° 2' 39" „ 3 7° 2' 39 
Ninth in 3 7° 2' 39",, 4 7° 2' 39 
Tenth 99 % 4 7° 2' 39",, 5 7° 2' 39 
Eleventh CIP N1 5 7° 2' 39",, 6 7° 2' 39 
Twelfth • • • • 6 7° 2' 39",, 7 7° 2' 39 
Current in India the other system of houses division is in which 
the tenth cusp is determined trigonometrically and then the distance 
between the M.C. (Meridian cusp) and the ascending degree is 
divided into three parts. This is described in Paddhati books in 
94 
Sanskrit and largely followed in India. But as we consider the 
equal house division more scientific and the older Hindu method 
we are using it in this book. More earnest enquirers for the other 
system may refer to other books on the subject. 
Now let us revert to the longitudes of planets which we worked 
out in the example chart in Chapter 4. They are : 
Sun 8 16 43 
Moon 5 17 15 
Mars 10 18 48 
Mercury 9 5 35 
Jupiter 6 8 53 
Venus 8 11 1 
Saturn 0 8 37 R 
Rahu 10 20 33 
Ketu 4 20 33 
Now because the Sun's longitudes is 8° 16' 43" (in the domain 
of the second house which extends from 8-7° 2' 39" to 9.7° main, 
the Sun will be in the second house, the Moon in the eleventh, 
Mars in the fourth, Mercury in second (because the domain of 
the second house is from 8-7° 2' 39" to 9-7° 2' 39"), Jupiter in 
the twelfth, Venus in the second, Saturn in sixth, Rahu in the 
fourth and Ketu in the tenth. 
While counting from sign to sign and treating houses as 
synonymous with signs, Mercury goes to the third, but in the 
scheme of house division as explained above, Mercury goes to 
the second. 
We would however recommend that beginners follow the 
simpler method, which is also followed by the majority, and that 
is to treat the entire ascending sign as the first house, the next 
sign the second- house, and so on. 
In Western astrology the cusps of house is the commencing 
point and the 'first house is constituted by space covering about 
30° beyond the cusp; but in Hindu astrology the cusp is the 
mid-point or the centre of the house and extends to 15° on either 
side. This is the major difference in the Hindu and the Western 
methods. 
It is now necessary to deal with matters which can be judged 
from each house. 
95 
WHAT TO JUDGE FROM EACH HOUSE 
In Hindu astrology, certain effects have been described for births 
according to Nakrhatra (location of the Moon in a particular 
constellation), Tithi (angular distance between the Sun and the 
Moon), Yoga (sum of the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon), 
location of planets in signs and houses and mutual disposition 
or aspects between planets, but the primary judgment of a 
particular matter or department of life is made from (i) planets 
and (ii) houses. • 
Each planet is a significator or Karaka for certain matters. 
For example, the Sun of father, the Moon of mother and so on, 
or the Sun of the soul and the Moon of the heart (emotional 
mind), Mercury of intelligence and so on. The significance of 
each planet has been dealt in detail in Chapter 6. But over and 
above this-each planet being the significator for certain matters, 
affairs, relationships, attributes, etc.-the affairs of a native have 
been divided as pertaining to one or more houses. There are 
twelve houses in a nativity because there are twelve signs. So, 
it would be but logical to assume that all the affairs of the world 
and hereafter (such as salvation, the state of the native after 
death) and also his state or condition-the deeds of merit or 
otherwise he performed in previous births—should be so divide.' 
among the twelve houses that no matter or affair is excluded. 
The logical consequence of this is that each house will have in 
its portfolio a large number of affairs. It is not possible to cover 
in this book all the affairs and relationships that a native has or 
derives pleasure or pain from. So the astrological texts have 
provided a broad outline and listed certain matters to be judged 
from each house. This list should, however, be taken as illustra- 
tive and not exhaustive; only the important affairs or relation- 
ships which each house governs have been stated. Others can be 
inferred. 
For example, the fifth house is the house of children. The 
fifth from fifth, i.e., the ninth house would represent the children's 
children (grandchildren). The seventh from the ninth, i.e., the 
third house would stand for the grandchild's husband :Or wife 
as the case may be. Or to take another example, the fifth house 
stands for children. The eleventh house being the seventh from 
the fifth would be taken for judgment in respect of the son's 
96 
wife or daughter's husband. Suppose one's son's wife's .hunger 
brother is associated with him or wants to associate with him in 
business. One has to determine whether he will be a source of 
happiness and prosperity. Now, since the son is judged from the 
fifth, the son's wife from the eleventh and the son's wife's brother 
from the third from eleventh, i.e., the first house, if a malefic 
enemy of the lord of the first house is in the ascendant, one 
may pronounce the judgment that the association in business with 
one's daughter-in.law's younger brother would be a source of 
trouble. But if instead of a malefic, a benefic is in the first house 
and he also happens to be a friend of the lord of the first, the 
business association with him would be a source of pleasure and 
profit. In this way many corollaries flow from one relationship. 
Readers will find that certain matters listed by the ancient texts 
have become obsolete, as for example, elephants, palanquins, 
forts, etc. For the astrologers of today, enlisting these would be 
superfluous and redundant; a few persons may keep elephants, 
but palanquins or forts are no more in vogue. But despite this, 
they have been added, firstly, to give an insight into the Hindu 
astrological thought which is of academic interest; and secondly 
to provide a basis for analogous inferences. The palanquin was 
an aristocratic and luxurious made of conveyance and we may 
include in our judgment today Hispanos and Rolls Royces in 
their place! 
Another thing which must be referred to in delineating matters' 
for judgment from each house is that certain matters might 
appear as duplications. This is true. We have stated hereunder 
certain matters, the positive side of which is represented by one 
house and the negative side by another house. For example,, the 
first house stands primarily for the body, health, strength or 
weakness, the physical constitution, personality, etc., and the 
sixth stands for ailments, ill health, sickness, wounds and such 
other matters. In such cases, the judgment has to be arrived at 
in the following manner. Suppose the first house is strong and 
the sixth afflicted. The native would have a good constitution 
and would generally be healthy, but suffer ill health or a particular 
ailment when the Dasha, Antardasha of the planet afflicting the 
sixth house is acting. On the other hand, let us take a case where 
the first house is weak and afflicted, but the sixth house is not. 
In such a case, there would not be a severe bout of illness, but the 
97 
general constitution of the native would not be strong; he would 
lack in the energy and enthusiasm required to light through life 
and for which his personal constitution and make-up would be 
the chief determining factor. 
Now let us take another example where there does not 
appear to be duplication, but where there actually is 
duplication. For example, according to certain authors Vidya ( 
education, learning) has to be judged from the second, while 
according to others from the fifth house and according to 
the south Indian school from the fourth house.' These 
differences will be discussed later. Now, the second house stands 
primiarily for speech, while the fifth house stands for 
intelligence. Suppose the second house is strong and the fifth is 
not. In such a case, the native would have good powers of 
speech and if the house and its lord are specially strong he may 
be able to impress his listeners with his learned discourses and 
masterful exposition of the Shastrar (texts of Hindu learning); 
but he may not be able to write so well or produce a learned 
work or may not be able to do erudite research work 
requiring penetrating intelligence, the ability for original enquiry, 
and profundity of thought. On the other hand, suppose the 
second house is weak and the fifth house is strong. In such a 
case, the native would be a profound scholar and may even 
be an eniment author of learned works, but he would lack the 
ability of public speaking and oral exposition. He may be able 
to propound a theory and write a thesis on it which might win the 
all round approbation of learned men in the line; but if he is 
asked to propound the theory to an assembly, he would be 
found utterly lacking in the power of verbal expression. Such 
learned men are not uncommon. 
Or let us take another example. The second house represents 
wealth. The fourth stands for immovable property, the 
ninth for Bhagya (general prosperity and affluence), 
and the eleventh is the house of gains. Apparently all these 
are covered by wealth. But the nicety or distinction is as 
follows : (i) the second house represents accumulated wealth 
—movable assets such as money, gold, jewellery; (ii) the 
fourth house represents immovable properties-houses, landed 
property, agricultural farms—cattle constitute movable 
property, but as in the rural economy of ancient India cattle 
were an adjunct to agriculture, and agriculture and dairy 
farming were correlated, all these have been taken as 
98 
pertaining to the fourth house; (iii) the ninth house stands for 
Bhagya a Sanskrit word representing general prosperity, all round 
happiness in respect of material affairs including domestic 
felicity, family happiness, respect of others and religious 
aptitude—a man may have no accumulated wealth, he may 
own no immovable properties, yet according to Hindu 
conception he may be described as having good Bhagya, if he 
is happy all round; (iv) the eleventh house represents income— 
if the eleventh house is strong the native may have plenty of 
recurring income, but if the second and the twelfth houses are 
afflicted, the native might not be able to accumulate money or 
if the fourth house is afflicted, he may have a large income but 
not own immovable property. If the fourth house is very strong 
and the eleventh weak, the native may have large properties but 
inadequate recurring income. Thus, there can be permutations 
and combinations according to which of the above four houses is 
strong and which weak. For a really affluent and wealthy 
person, all the four houses, i.e., the second, fourth, ninth and 
eleventh, should be strong and the twelfth house should not be 
stronger than the first or eleventh, otherwise the expenditure 
would be greater than the income. As the eighth house 
represents death and things buried in the bowels of the earth, 
any money incidental to or arising out of or connected with 
death/longevity would fall in the portfolio of the eighth house. 
So also would treasure buried underground be governed by the 
eighth. 
Now, let us consider a residential house. It is governed by the 
fourth house. But Rudra* states that the fourth house stands 
for a hereditary house and the eighth house for a 
subsequently acquired one. If the fourth house is weak and the 
eighth strong, the native would dispose of the old hereditary 
house and acquire a new one. According to the Prashna Marga 
houses, such as, Mathar (monasteries) and secondary 
residential houses, such as, a country house or a building at a 
pleasure resort, etc., are to be judged from the eighth. 
According to Parashar, residential premises are judged from 
the ninth also, probably on the assumption that for a man to 
be fortunate (fortune in general is judged from the ninth), it is 
necessary that he should live in comfortable premises, though 
he may not own them. Thus there is a subtle distinction in 
respect of residential premises as judged 
99 
from the fourth, eighth or ninth houses. 
In South India, the father is judged from the ninth, while in 
North India, he is judged from the tenth. The ninth house is 
primarily Dharma Sthana, i.e., the house of religion, piety, 
devotion to God, good morals and righteous conduct, and of the 
Gum or the religious preceptor who initiates one into the spiritual 
life. According to Hindu concepts, a man is born twice, firstly 
when he is born out of his mother's body, and the second time 
when he is initiated spiritually during the thread ceremony. This 
latter ritual is done by the Guru and in Brahman families, the 
father himself generally used to be Guru. So, the two offices of 
father and Guru became blended together and judgment used 
to be made by reference to the ninth house. 
Similarly, in South India, Vidya (education, learning) is judged 
from the fourth house, while in the north, it is judged from the 
fifth. It is not only in regard to this matter but to many others 
also that there are different schools of Hindu astrology. And this 
is natural, the continuous process of dynamic activity in a field 
of learning for many centuries prevented the principles and practice 
of astrology from becoming static and the divergences of 
thought in many directions represent the vital growth of the 
astrological science through the ages. In fact, the concepts of 
Western astrology as existing today can also be traced through 
the Greeks and Romans, the Chaldean and the Arabs, to the 
parent system of ancient India. A large number of European 
astrologers subscribe to the view that the Chaldeans were the 
originators of astrology, but Hindu sources point to the growth 
and development of the stellar prognostication to times 
immemorial. However, scholars may differ on this and other 
points and stick in all sincerity to their own beliefs; differences 
and distinctions indicate vitality and independent powerful 
thinking. 
We shall now enumerate the various facets of life and matters , 
pertaining to the affairs of man as judged from different houses. 
As regards the part of the human body which each house 
represents, we have dealt with this in the Chapter 5 on signs. 
Similarly the principle of a particular planet governing specific 
affairs has been dealt with in the Chapter 6 under Karakar. 
Thus the determination of a matter is dually controlled by the 
house and the Karaka. If we have, for example, to judge the 
seventh house—the wife in a male nativity, we have to appraise 
100 
not only the seventh house but Venus also. Thus for judgment 
we have to examine the two streams, Karaka and house, flowing 
together in one channel. These two component factors have to be 
examined minutely and thoroughly to arrive at the correct result. 
We shall now provide a brief outline of what is to be judged 
from each house. In doing so, we shall for the interest and 
enlightenment of serious readers refer at places to the authority 
advocating the matters of judgment from each house. 
I HOUSE 
According' to Parashar the body, constitution and proportions, 
appearance, knowledge, complexion, strength or weakness of the 
native and also of the nativity and the temperament have to be 
judged from the first house. Among parts of the body the head is 
governed by this house and according to the Dreshkana, also the 
throat and Basti. * 
According to Rudra, it is the self which experiences health or 
disease, happiness or sorrow and all this is therefore judged from 
the first house. 
According to Vaidyanatha, fame, personal characteristics, 
residence abroad, splendour, are also to be judged from the first. 
According to Sanketnidhi, an authoritative text on astrology, a 
general estimate of the happiness or misery the native is destined 
to, is also to be guauged from this house; the mother's father ( 
tenth from fourth), father's mother (fourth from tenth) and other 
relations have also to be determined from this house. The 
PrashnaMarga, (written several centuries back) a very authorita- 
tive work on astrology, includes good health (a coroUary of body), 
standing in society (status), fame, happiness, and victory over 
enemies as matters for judgment from the first house. The 
Uttarakalamrita another ancient text-book in Sanskrit, gives a 
more exhaustive list and though there would be repetition of 
some of the items already listed, it is worth while to provide a 
* A Dreshkana means a decanate. A sign is divided into three parts, 
(i) 0° to 10°, (ii) 11° to 20°, (Hi) 21° to 30°. 
If the second decanate rises, the first house governs the Throat also. 
If the third Dreshkana rises (i.e., the degree of the rising sign is 21° to 30°), 
the first house governs basti also. For the meaning of basti, refer to 
Chapter 5. 
101 
translation of the relevant text. 
The first house represents the body parts, happiness or, misery, 
old age, knowledge, place of birth, fame, sleep, dreams, strength, 
dignity, diplomacy or polity, longevity, peace of mind, age, hair, 
pride, life, gambling or betting on behalf of others, honour, skin, 
loss of money (being twelfth from second), insult, temperament, 
illness, asceticism, nature, activity, efforts connected with living 
beings (such as family members or cattle), loss of respect, blame 
from others. Thus we find that the main consideration is of " 
self and the various matters arising as .corollaries thereof. One 
point should, however, be clarified : the degrees from O(zero) 
of the sign ascending to the degree rising represent the left side 
of the head, while that from the degree rising to the end of the 
sign ascending represent the right side of the head. Any malefic, 
particularly Mars, afflicted in the first house is likely to cause 
a hurt on the left or the right side of the head according to the 
degree tenanted by the natal Mars. Sometimes, there is no hurt, 
but the native suffers from smallpox or similar diseases that 
might leave permanent marks. 
II HOUSE 
According to Parashar, wealth, family, the family members, death, 
enemies, precious metals, jewels, have to be determined from 
the second house. The eyes are governed by the second and twelfth 
houses—the right eye by the second. So also according to the 
Drerhkana rising (first, second • or third) the eye, the right 
shoulder and the right portion of genitals and anus. According to 
Rudra wealth is the source of food, clothes, etc., and therefore 
the second house determines these. According to Vaidyanath, in 
addition to the matters referred to above, knowledge, happiness, 
learning, education, speech, and food are also governed by the 
second house. In the physical body the second house governs the 
face, the mouth and tongue, and naturally all food and drinks 
taken in by the mouth fall in the portfolio of the second house. 
In ancient India the acquisition of knowledge and learning was 
primarily oral and the exposition and expression of knowledge 
was Oki- mainly through speech. When we discuss the fourth and 
the fifth houses we shall observe that in South India, Vidya ( 
education and learning) is judged from the fourth, and in North 
102 
India from the fifth; but as far as expression is concerned, the 
second house is important. According to the Sanketnidhi, pur- 
chase and sale of goods, which brings in money, are also to be 
judged from this house. According to the PrarhnaMarga, all 
who are to be fed or maintained, money, learning, education and 
speech are to be judged from the second house. The Uttarakala- 
mrita gives a long list and it is only right and proper that readers 
should be acquainted with it. The following are to be determined 
from the second house : power and quality of speech, wealth, 
faith in God, maintenance of others, nails, edibles, truth and 
falsehood which are after all attributes of speech, the tongue, eyes, 
clothes, diamonds, copper, gold, rubies, pearls, determination, 
perfumes, family, purchase and sale, soft speech, generosity in 
giving, efforts for acquisition of wealth, assistance, friends, lustre 
of the face, miserliness in spending, cheerfulness, good oratory, 
learning, granaries (this was one of the chief items of wealth in 
ancient India), courtesy in speech, the nose, fixity of mind as 
opposed to fickleness of the heart, going out or coming in, the 
person or persons near the native, life and the state of being 
wealthy. Thus we find that the various items listed above are 
all corollaries of wealth or matters connected with the mouth, 
such as, speech or food. The second house refers to persons 
close to the native, because the second house is next to the 
first. 
Ill HOUSE 
According to Parashar, valour, brothers, servants and sisters, 
travelling, advice or learned discourse, death of parents, have to 
be adjudged from the third house. The right ear is also to be 
judged from this house, so also the right arm and the right 
testicle according to the Dreshkana rising. Valour means great 
prowess, physical as well as mental. According to Rudra, com- 
panions are also to be judged from the third house. 
According to Vaidyanatha, both the elder and the younger 
brothers are to be judged from the third. Another school however 
takes the third house as representing younger brothers and the 
eleventh as governing the elder brothers and sisters, because the 
first house ("self) would be third from the eleventh. 
The throat is according to Vaidyanatha governed by the third: 
103 
also what is heard. The ornaments worn in the ear are also 
governed by this house. This author also includes .articles of 
apparel, steadiness (a corollary of stamina and courage), edible 
roots and fruit. According to the Sanketnidhi, since the first 
house governs the mother's father, the third governs the mother's 
father's brother. It also governs slaves of the native, the Prarhna 
Marga also includes the right ear and the assistants of the native 
in his work or undertaking fall in the portfolio of the third 
house. 
Generally speaking, the throat, neck, shoulders, arms and the 
upper part of the chest fall under the jurisdiction of the third house. 
Thus, readers will observe that there is a distinction between the 
second house governing the throat according to Western astrology 
and the third house governing the throat according to Hindu 
astrology. The latter makes a distinction between speech where 
the tongue and the lips are primarily exercised and singing where 
melody arises in the throat. Let us examine the long list of items 
that according to Utiarakalamrita are to be judged from the third 
house: patience and perseverance, sisters, fight, ear, leg, place of 
travel (the distance covered on foot or short travels), perplexity or 
confusion of mind (the third house being twelfth from fourth), 
power, stamina, strength, paradise, causing distress to others (an 
element arising out of fighting), dreams, a fighter, valour, one's 
relations, friends, walking, the throat, good food, apportionment 
of property received as legacy (a corollary of brothers, among 
whom generally the property was partitioned), ornaments, 
qualities like virtues and vices, education, hobbies which engage 
the mind, sports, pleasure and vigour, status connected with 
birth in a good family, servants, the space between the root 
of the thumb and above the life line (the mount of Mars below 
the mount of Venus on the palm), female slaves, short travels 
in a comfortable conveyance, a large undertaking, one's religion ' 
the third house being complementary to the ninth). 
IV HOUSE 
According to Parashar, coveyances, friends, relatives, maternal as 
well as paternal, mother, happiness, treasure, fields, agricultural 
property, dwelling, houses, gardens, etc., are to be determined 
from the fourth house. The holy places of Dharma (religion, 
104 
piety, moral virtues, devotion to God, righteous conduct) have 
also to be judged from the fourth house. The right portion of the 
nose is governed by this house, so also the right side of the chest 
and the right thigh. 
According to Rudra, the fourth house represents the hereditary 
house—the house in which one is born in and the eighth 
represents the one acquired subsequently. If the fourth house is 
weak and the lord of the eighth in eighth, the native disposes 
of his ancestral home and acquires a new house and lives therein. 
In regard to matters governed by this house, Vaidyanatha 
includes education, the welfare of or happiness of mother, sweet 
smells (because the nose is governed by the fourth), the qualities 
or inclinations of the heart. Some astrologers also include clothes. 
According to the Sanketnidhi, wells and tanks are also to be 
judged from this house. According to the Prarhna Marga, the 
mother, the maternal uncle, sister's children, delicacy, water, 
sleeping, increase and cattle are to be included in the fourth 
house. The Uttarakalamrita furnishes the following list: 
V idya (education or erudition), kingdom, residential house, 
going away from house or leaving the birth place, good con- 
veyances on land or water, anointing the body, mother, Bandhu ( 
relations) and friends, caste, clothes, wells and tanks in which 
water rises from underground), water, milk, perfumes, happiness, 
good name and reputation, divine herbs used for medication, 
confidence or belief, false propaganda or uttering a lie, a Mandapa 
(this is a Sanskrit word meaning a canopy or structure of bamboos, 
grass or a small masonry building under which a religious cere- 
mony is performed), triumph or victory, causing perspiration, agri- 
culture, fields, gardens, digging of wells and tanks and religious 
ceremonies connected with wells, tanks, etc. and dedication of 
these to public or private use, relations through mother or other 
women of the category of mother, diagnosis, intellect, father, wife, 
placing wealth in safe custody (the fourth house deals with the 
underground and money and precious metals which used to be 
consigned to underground pits or vaults for safety) a beautiful 
mansion, architecture (because it pertains to houses), buildings, 
entry into a house, ultimate results, temperament, loss of house ( 
this is the negative aspect), ancestral property or what is one's 
own, feeding of gods, indication of place where stolen property 
has been consigned, an ant-hill, knowledge of the Yedas and 
105 
Shastras—the sacred books of the Hindus, buffaloes, cows, horses, 
elephants, good yields of crops. All these are to be judged from 
the fourth house. 
Y HOUSE 
According to Parashar, Yantms (charms engraved on metal plates), 
Mantras (religious incantations in prescribed manner for fulfil- 
ment of a particular objective), progeny (sons and daughters), 
fall from kingship or high office (because it is eighth from tenth) 
have to be adjudged from the fifth house. The right cheek is 
governed by this house, as also the right side of the heart and the 
right knee according to whether the first, second or the third 
Dreshkana rises, i.e., is the ascending degree. 
According to Rudra, intelligence and discretion—what to do 
and what not to do and good counsel—are to be judged from the 
fifth house. 
Vaidyanatha includes the following under the fifth house, 
called the house of sons or children: native's family deity, 
sovereign, sons and daughters, father (though father is primarily 
judged from the ninth in South India and from the tenth in 
North India), intelligence, religion, legacy of good actions due to 
good actions in previous birth, a pilgrimage should be judged 
from the second, fifth, seventh and tenth. According to the 
Sanketnidhi, intelligence, inclination, production of works in- 
cluding books and authorship, disciples, are also judged from this 
house. According to Prashna Marga, intelligence, talent, 
memory, discretion, Mantras, ministership, sons and good in- 
clinations are to be judged from this house. The Uttarkalamrita 
gives the following long list of affairs which fall in the portfolio 
of the fifth : children, virtuous acts, giving rise to religious 
merit, ministers of a king or ministers and the king, good behaviour 
and a good heart, artisanship, inclinations of the mind, education, 
conception leading to the birth of a child, discrimination, the 
umbrella which was the ancient insignia of royalty, good stores, 
auspicious letters like invitations to religious or social ceremonies 
and functions, the various desired objectives and actions in 
pursuance thereof, father's money, anxiety of a distant matter or 
far-sightedness, gain of money or fortune arising out of or con- 
nected with wife or husband (the fifth house being eleventh from 
106 
the seventh), embrace of a prostitute, depth of mind, sobriety, 
intensity or gravity, mystery, courtesy, descriptive writing of long 
articles or books, business, affection, literary productions or 
works of poetry, entering into an undertaking, stomach, Mantrar, 
and realisation thereof, devotion to God, cheerfulness, affluence, 
giving of grain in charity, the goodness (Punya) arising out of 
good actions of religious merit, intelligence, review of matter, 
good thoughts, efforts for earning money, musical instruments 
and auspicious occasions for music and singing, good deed, 
erudition, contentment, and a hereditary post of a minister in a 
state. 
These items give an insight into the logic of arriving at matters 
which should be judged from a particular house. 
VI HOUSE 
According to Parashar, the sixth house governs maternal uncle ( 
mother's brother), god of death, worries and anxieties, fear of 
calamities, enemies, wounds, and step-mother. The right portion 
of the chin is governed by this house as also the right portion 
of the stomach and the right calf of the leg, according to the 
Dreshkana rising. 
According to Rudra, all diseases arising out of one or more 
of the three humours-Vata, Pitta and Kapha (wind, bile and 
phlegm) and hurts, whether due to assault or due to falls, etc., 
are to be judged from the sixth, Vaidyanatha includes vices or 
vicious habits in the portfolio of the sixth house, probably because 
the sixth governs enemies and forces which pull down and one's own 
vices and vicious habits are one's worst enemies and the most 
important factor which works to the detriment of the native and 
brings him distress by undermining him The Jatakaratna, a stan- 
dard work in Sanskrit, while enumerating matters to be judged 
from the sixth, includes thieves also and all handicaps or obstruc- 
tions in the path of progress of the native as well as distress. 
In addition to the above, the Sanketnidhi states that battles, 
maternal uncle and cruel acts are also to be judged from this 
house. According to the Prashna Marga, thieves enemies, obstacles, 
mental and physical diseases and death at an enemy's hands are 
also to be judged from the sixth house. 
In addition to the matters already enumerated above, the 
107 
Uttarakalamritaalso includes the following in the portfolio of 
the sixth house : fighting in a battle or combat, phlegm (i.e. 
diseases arising of the maladjustment of Kapha or phlegm, one 
of the three humours regulating health in human body), 
dysentery, swelling of any part of the body, insanity, wounds, 
boils, sickness, eye troubles, urinary and venereal diseases, 
gout, severe colicky pain, phthisis,-exertion, weariness, fall from a 
boat, mental worry, intense anguish of mind, severe reproach, 
miserliness, cruel deeds, debt, enmity, receiving charity or alms, 
troubles, untimely meals, poison, guarding of one's credit, theft, 
calamity, imprisonment, or prison house, misunderstanding with 
brothers. Thus we see that all the above are only details of 
suffering, physical or mental, which have been pithily referred 
to by other writers. The only additional points worthy of our 
attention are (i) gain, and (ii) service which this Sanskrit text 
includes. In Western and Middle Eastern astrology the sixth house 
includes 'service' as falling in the jurisdiction of the sixth. But 
other writers have not included gain under the sixth house. 
However Kalidas appears to have done so for three reasons. 
Firstly, 'gain' is the positive side of loss, debts, etc; and secondly, 
the sixth house is an Upachaya house (Upachaya means 'in- 
crease'); thirdly, the sixth house is ninth from tenth and tenth 
from ninth and by the theory of Bhavat Bhavah, he judges the 
Bhava (house) from the Bhava, on which principle the eighth 
being the house of longevity, the eighth from eighth, that is, the 
third from the ascendant is also called the house of longevity. 
VII HOUSE 
Parar/zarstates that wife or husband, journeys, expenditure 
at night, and one's own death must be looked up from the seventh 
house. The face is also governed by this house and so also the 
navel and the feet according to whether the first, second or third 
Drerhkana is rising. According to Rudra the seventh house 
stands for sexual desires, enjoyment of women (by analogy 
enjoyment of men in female nativities). 
Vaidyanatha states that from the seventh house, an astrologer 
can ascertain everything about a journey, the native's sons, wife 
and enjoyment. What has been stated earlier about happiness or 
misery in respect of sons in relation to the fifth house may also 
108 
be predicted from the seventh. It is true, wife and children are 
co-related and children are a corollary of wife. According to 
ancient Hindu thought, the chief object of having a wife was to 
beget children. But to include all affairs of the children seems 
to be inexplicable unless we reconcile it in the following manner : 
one cannot beget children unilaterally. A second party is required 
to bear children. Children are as much the product of the first 
party as of the second and so if we take the seventh house as 
co-ascendant (ascendant of the second party) and the fifth from 
it also into consideration, it may reveal the state of affairs in 
regard to the children (of the wife and also the native's children). 
Dhundhiraja, the author of Jatakabharana, a standard text in 
Sanskrit, includes the battle-field and trading (commercial 
business) in this house. According to the Sanketnidhi, contro- 
versies and litigation, water-houses (for serving free drinking 
water), conveyances and trade and commerce must also be 
included in matters to be judged from the seventh. According to 
the Prashna Marga, marriage, sexual affairs including extra 
marital connections, bed, house and lost wealth are to be judged 
from this house. 
We give below from the Uttarakalamrita a list of matters to 
be judged from the seventh house: marriage, sexual union, 
adultery, success in love affairs, enmity with an unchaste woman ( 
and in female nativities enmity with an adulterous person), 
semen, adulterous nature or otherwise, deviation from moral 
conduct, losing the right track in travelling, break in a journey, 
loss of memory, money placed elsewhere, good scents, betel leaf, 
partaking of delicious food, curds, sweet drinks, acquisition of 
apparel, a couple of wives, genitals, urine, anus, gift or giving 
in charity, trade, victory over enemy, litigation, adopted son, 
foreign place, theft. It will be observed, while going through 
matters falling in the portfolio of the eighth house that the 
genitals are included by many authors under the eighth house 
also. In fact, in the physical body also, the regions governed by 
the two houses, the seventh and the eighth, are so inter-related 
and overlapping that it is difficult to place them in water-tight 
compartments. This difficulty has confronted authors of Western 
astrology also. For example, Alan Leo writes : "We must 
carefully distinguish between the part ruled by Libra and those 
by Scorpio. An apparent Libran disorder may be actually due to 
109 
Scorpionic influence. For instance, suppression of urine and 
retention of urine are different things; the former is a true Libran 
complaint occuring when the kidneys for some reason or other 
do not secrete the urine; the latter is Scorpionic, the urine being 
duly secreted by the kidneys, but retained for some reason in 
the bladder." 
Such modern minute analytical details have not been gone 
into by the ancient authors and so at times we find the boundaries 
overlapping. 
VIII HOUSE 
Parashara says that this house governs the genitals and anus, 
incurring debts, giving of loans, piles, fistulas, prolapsus and 
other diseases of the rectum motion, gait, that which is not 
stated (that is, what we mean by the English expression 'reading 
between the lines'), has to be judged from the eighth house. A 
synonym for the eighth house is a 'hole or a 'cavity.' So also 
the left part of the chin, the left region of the stomach and 
the left calf of the leg, according to the decanate rising. 
According to Rudra, all kinds of Adhi (mental distress) and 
Vyadhi (physical pain ailments, agony and diseases) and cala- 
mities are to be judged from the eighth house. 
The eighth is called the house of longevity; so also the third 
house which is eighth from eighth. But primarily, longevity, the 
genitals and excretory organs, milk, honey, urinary diseases, 
splitting of partnership or split between friends, defeat by 
diplomatic strategy, death—its cause, the month, the day of the 
week, the asterism in which the moon will be at the time of death 
—all are to be ascertained from the eighth. According to the 
Jatakabharanagoing across the rivers and things across the 
rivers and by analogy things across the seas and oceans, severe 
difficulties or path through rough mountainous regions or 
through wild dense forests, weapons, calamities, are also to be 
judged from this house. According to the Sanketnidhi, fear of 
enemies, boats, arrest, detention, crossing a river, theft, going 
astray down the wrong path, literally as well as symbolically, etc., 
are also to be judged from the eighth house. The author adds 
that all matters such as wealth, which are judged from the second 
house, must be judged from the eighth also, because this house 
110 
is directly opposite to the second and thus complementary to the 
latter and any planets herein will fully aspect and influence the 
second house. He states that malefics in the eighth house destroy 
wealth, but benefics in the eighth bring wealth. According to the 
Prarhna Marga, total destruction, calamities, bad name and ill 
fame, the cause and place of death, slaves, acquisition or con- 
struction of religious properties, house, impediments, and 
ailments are to be judged from the eighth house. The 
Uttarakalamrita includes the following among matters to 
be judged from the eighth house; longevity, death, cause of death, 
mutilation of a,limb, happiness, defeat, fear, calamity, quarrels 
due to grain, punishment inflicted by government, great mental 
distress, legacy or the wealth of the dead repaying a debt, loss of 
money, money deposited or kept at a place permanently, money 
of others received inadvertantly, facial disease (the eighth being 
in opposition to the second house), urinary diseases, fatigue, 
brother's enemy (the eighth house being sixth from third), trouble 
to wife (being second, a Maraka place from seventh), enemy's 
fort, battle, hazardous paths, evil news, causing or death of 
animals by the native. 
Apparently contradictory matters, such as longevity and death, 
happiness and mental distress, etc., are really not contradictory 
but represent the positive and the negative aspects of the same 
content. 
IX HOUSE 
Parashar states that a residential house, Dharma (religion 
piety, good morals, righteous conduct, devotion to gods and 
manes), wife's brothers (by analogy husband's brothers also), 
brother's wife (because it is seventh from third), by analogy sisters' 
husbands also, visiting of holy rivers, sacred baths, worshipping 
at temples and religious shrines—all these must be looked up 
from the ninth house. So also the left cheek, the left portion of 
the heart and the left knee, according to the Dreshkana rising. 
According to Rudra, the ninth house stands for the religious 
preceptor, one who counsels, directs and guides in all matters 
that bring happiness in this world and the next. The Hindus 
believe in a life after death and the transmigration of souls. The 
eighth house stands for death or the destruction of this physical 
Ill 
body and so no wonder the ninth house, i.e., next to eighth, 
stands for the next world. According to Vaidyanatha, prosperity 
in general, and religious austerities are included. According to the 
Jatakaratna, money given in alms and charities, people who dine 
with the native, and sons' sons, are also to be judged from the ninth. 
According to the Sanketnidhi, religious and charitable properties 
are also to be judged from this house, which is complementary 
to the third and judgment in respect of brothers and sisters should 
also be made from it. Benefic male planets here aspecting the 
third, the native would have brothers; if benefit female planets 
tenant the ninth the native will have sisters. Malefics would 
cause illness to or premature death of brothers or sisters. Accord- 
ing to the PrashnaMarga, general prosperity, fortune, Dharma ( 
religion), benevolence, acts of religious merit, austerities, 
penances, father, sons' children, charity, devotion to God, 
goodness of heart, and religious preceptors, are to be judged from 
the ninth. 
The Uttarakalamritaalso refers to the above matters. The 
following additional matters are also listed : 
Medicines, efforts for acquisition of learning, conveyance, 
travelling, all kinds of wealth, place of coronation, investment of 
money. Being fifth from fifth, this house also stands for grand- 
children. 
X HOUSE 
According to Parashar, the kingdom (it can apply to the nativi- 
ties of kings or members of the royal family who are or can 
be heirs to a kingdom) and so by analogy, in the nativities of 
common men, it should refer to rank and status, position and 
authority to give orders, command, ruling powers, the sky. means 
of livelihood and all actions and dealings in pursuance thereof, 
respect, honour, father, living abroad, debts, have to be judged 
from the tenth house. So also the left portion of the nose, the 
left side of the chest and the left thigh according to the decanate 
rising. According to Rudra, the word 'respect' connotes all senti- 
ments and experiences which elevate and uplift the feeling of 
self-gratification and the honour and homage paid by others— 
whether by the members of a clan or community or government 
must be judged from the tenth. Also from the tenth is to be 
112 
judged whether the native would be able to retain his position 
or topple down as a result of opposition and enmities. 
According to Vaidyanatha, in addition to the matters stated 
above, the native's actions or activities, ornaments, sleep, agri- 
culture, renunciation of worldly life and taking to asceticism, 
means of livelihood, are to be judged from the tenth. According 
to the Sanketnidhi, the tenth house includes the backbone, trade 
and commerce, seal of authority, position, etc. If malefics tenant 
the tenth house there may be pain in the knees, the back, etc. 
According to the PrarhnaMarga, temples, the city, municipal, 
legislative or administrative council, rest houses where free lodging 
and boardings used to be provided for travellers, commonly 
known in India as Dharrnashalas, slaves, all activity, authority, 
and support, are to be judged from the tenth house. 
Kalidasa in his Uttarakalamrita includes trade, depositing of a 
treasure, riding a horse, road or track for a journey, athletics, 
teaching, supremacy, fame, elders, talismans, mother, adopted 
son, as in matters to be judged from the tenth house. 
XI HOUSE 
According to Parashar, gain of money, things or miscellaneous 
articles, son's wife, enemies and matters pertaining to them, 
should be judged from the eleventh house. So also the left ear, 
the left arm and the left testicle, according to the Dreshkana 
rising. According to Rudra, all gains are to be judged from the 
eleventh. According to Jatakaratna. the elders (brothers and 
sisters), wealth and hopes, should also be judged from this house. 
According to Jatakabharana, gain or acquisition of elephants, 
gold, cloth, jewels, palanquins and all the paraphernalia of luxury, 
are to be judged from here. According to the Sanketnidhi, gain of 
knowledge like learning and education, elephants, horses, con- 
veyances, palanquins, gold ornaments, apparel and auspicious 
events are to be judged from this house. This house, being 
opposite to the fifth, should also be consulted for judgment in 
regard to affairs pertaining to the fifth house according to the 
nature of the planets-benefics or malefics—in the eleventh house. 
According to the Prashna Marga, all desired or cherished objec- 
tives like hopes and aspirations and the fulfilment thereof, the 
elder brother, all sons already born (those who are to be born 
113 
have to be judged from the fifth), the left ear and gain of money 
are to be judged from the eleventh house. 
The Uttarakalamritav&p&ati some of the affairs already given 
above. In addition, according to this text, wicked desires, sub- 
servience, paternal uncle (being third from ninth; according to 
the south Indian school of Hindu astrology, father is judged 
from the ninth), paternal property, ministership, the master's 
wealth, lost wealth, cooking, lovely paintings and skill in prac- 
tical arts, gain from father-in-law, rise in prosperity, mother's 
longevity (eleventh being eighth from fourth) are to be judged 
from the eleventh house. 
XII HOUSE 
According to Parashar, expenditure, and by analogy, financial 
loss, tidings about an enemy and the end have to be judged 
from the twelfth house. Also, the left eye, the left shoulder, 
and the left portion of the genitals and anus, according to the 
Dreshkana rising. According to Vaidyanatha, a person's wander- 
ing far away from his home-land, misfortune, giving away in 
charity, loss or purchase of luxury, comforts of the bed (sexual 
pleasures), and the waste of wealth are to be judged from this 
house. According to the Jatakaratna. all kinds of expenditure of 
bodily vigour as well as of wealth, fall, hell (the native's going to 
hell after this life), infirmity of a limb, are to be judged from the 
twelfth. According to Jatakabharana, losses, charity, expenditure, 
punishment, confinement, arrest—all these are to be judged from 
this house. According to the Sanketnidhi. imprisonment, accep- 
tance (such as of wife or husband, i.e., marriage), punishment, 
are to be judged from here. According to the Prashna Marga. 
sins, expenditure, fall (physically while on the road or from a 
house top and also figuratively from a high office or fall into 
hell), the left eye, affliction of a limb, are to be judged from 
the twelfth house. 
Among matters falling in the portfolio of the twelfth house 
included in the Uttarakalamrita, are break in sleep, adultery, 
loss of wife, impediment in sexual enjoyment, mental distress, 
enemy, fear of enemy, paternal wealth, discharge of debts, going 
to foreign lands, going to heaven, gallantry, humility, brother or 
sister of father (being third from tenth), fall in this house. 
A.-8 
114 
We have referred in detail to the matters which are to be 
judged from each house and provided a cross section of view 
as held by various eminent ancient authors. Matters of the world 
are inexhaustible and corollaries flowing out0f each of the items 
may cover a wide network. No book can exhaustively enumerate 
all these matters, much less a text-book of this type. But the 
general canons of Hindu astrology have been succinctly stated 
above. 
SUMMARY 
The list of matters to be judged from each house is long and 
may appear formidable. Beginners are likely to be frightened by 
the long array. But that has been done to provide a glimpse of 
the wide horizons of Hindu astrology. They need not take into 
account all the matters given above for judgment from each of 
the twelve houses. For their benefit, we are giving below a short 
and condensed list of matters which should be judged from each 
house. 
First house: self, head, body, personality, mental tempera- 
ment, health. 
Second house: eyes, face, upper part of the throat, speech, 
wealth, family. 
Third house: arms, lower part of the throat, shoulders, brothers, 
sisters, valour. 
Fourth house: chest, heart, mother, landed property, friends, 
conveyances, happiness. 
Fifth house: stomach, education, intelligence, sons, daughters. 
Sixth house: the region of navel, illness, enemies, debts, 
distress. 
Seventh house: partnership, sexual relations, husband or wife, 
the part of the body below the waist and up to the genitals. 
Eighth house: genitals, anus, death, legacies. 
Ninth house: hips, thighs, religion, devotion to God, prosperity, 
religious preceptor. 
Tenth house: knees, back, father, position in life, activity, 
status, honour from government. 
Eleventh house: calves of legs, income. 
Twelfth house: expenditure, loss, sexual enjoyment, left eye, 
teeth, confinement. 
115 
It will be found quite sufficient for beginners to confine their 
attention to judgment of the above matters only from each 
house. 
CHAPTER 
PLANETS IN SIGNS 
Given below are the effects of planets in the different signs. First 
we give the influence which the planet would exert anywhere in 
the sign, occupying any degree from 1 to 30. Then will be des- 
cribed the effects if the planet occupies a particular degree or sets 
of degrees. One important principle of astrology should not be 
lost sight of. And that is that for certain purposes the first sign, 
Aries, corresponds to the first house; the second sign, Taurus 
would correspond to the second house, and so on. Thus a malefic 
in _Aries would affect adversely the head or brain, a malefic in 
Virgo the intenstines, and so on. Benefics in Taurus would improve 
wealth, in Libra conjugal happiness, and so on. 
SUN IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 
Sun in Aries 
If the Sun is in the 10th degree of Aries, it makes the native 
famous, fond of travelling and connected with manufacture of or 
trade in arms. But the native will not be rich. Such a person is 
capable of rising to the highest pinnacle of leadership. It is better 
to have the Sun from 1° to 10° than from 10° to 30°. The Sun 
anywhere in Aries makes the native courageous; he has strong 
bones but the health may cause trouble due to too much heat, 
excess of bile or blood disorders. If the Sun is from 0° to 30° 20' 
or from 13° 20' to 16° 40', it will have very good effects during 
117 
his Dasha or Antardasha. But if the Sun is between 20° to 23° 
20', all good effects due to sign position are completely devalued. 
The native is indolent, timid, unreliable and suffers disappoint- 
ments and frustrations in his career.* 
Sun in Taurus 
The native will succeed in buying, selling or trading in cloth 
and scented things. He is a connoisseur of music and singing. But 
he is not an ardent lover of his wife or may have enmity with a 
barren woman. He is capable of bearing much physical stress and 
strain like a bull; suffers from the diseases of the mouth and the 
eyes. He is clever in dealing with others; does not have many 
enemies; is afraid of water. 
The Sun will show much better effect during his Dasha and 
Antardasha if between 10° and 16° 40' or between 23° 20' and 
26° 40'. 
Sun in Gemini 
The native receives good education, is learned and fond of 
astrology. He is intelligent, clever, wealthy and liberal in dealing 
with others. His memory is good; he is courteous and speaks in 
an agreeable manner. He may be brought up by a woman other 
than his mother or may have two mothers. 
If the Sun occupies any degree from 20° to 23° 20' or 26° 40' 
to 30°, he will have much better effects during his Dasha and 
Antardasha, but if in 0° to 3° 20', much of the good effects des- 
cribed above will be devalued and the Dasha and Antardasha 
will cause setbacks in health and give rise to mental worries. 
Sun in Cancer 
The native has a good appearance; is fond of wine; he is not 
capable of continuous hard work and is easily tired; he acts 
quickly; is engaged in the work of others; has a sharp temper 
and opposes his own people, particularly his father, uncle, etc. 
* Two sets of views have been described for each planet in each sign. 
If the planet is in the special degrees as stated to be good, the maximum 
good effects come to pass and the evil ones are not felt or are' at their 
minimum. Conversely, if the planet occupies the unfavourable degrees, 
as stated for each planet under each sign or the planet 'is combust, the 
good effects are felt at their minimum and unfavourable ones are at their 
maximum. 
118 
He has to maintain a large family; has many servants, but is 
usually worried. He is not rich and does not have a very agreeable 
wife. The native suffers from imbalance of bile and phlegm in 
the body. 
If the Sun occupies any longitude between 0° and 6° 40', his 
Dasha and Antardasha would be comparatively better, but if 
between 10° and 13° 20', much of the good influences described 
above will be devalued and the evil effects delineated above will 
be more prominent. 
Sun in Leo 
The native is proud, courageous, enthusiastic, famous; at times 
violent in temper. If a non-vegetarian, fond of meat dishes. He 
has qualities of leadership; is deep and has much stamina. The 
native is rich and has commanding manners and generally occupies 
a good position in life. He is endowed with intelligence; anni- 
hilates his enemies. The native is fond of forests, mountains, 
cows and cattle. 
The Sun shows better results if therein from 0° to 20° than 
in the remaining ten degrees. Much of the good influences are 
devalued if between 20° to 23° 20' and the Dasha of the planet 
proves unfavourable. If however the longitude, occupied is bet- 
ween 0° to 3° 20' or 13° 20' to 16° 40', the good effects described 
show very good results and the Dasha and the Antardasha are 
beneficial. 
Sun in Virgo 
The native is shy and has a feminine appearance. He is clever 
in writing, painting, poetry, and mathematics; has a good memory; 
his speech is endearing, soft and humble; he is generally intelligent 
and good in education. He has not much physical or mental 
stamina; pays homage to religious preceptors and is efficient in 
serving others. The native is fond of literature, songs and music. 
The planet will show very good results if the longitude tenanted 
is between 10° and 13° 20' or between 23° 20' and 30°. 
Sun in Libra 
The planet would be debilitated here and as such weak. The 
soul would not be strong and matters governed by the Sun would 
not show very good results. From 0° to 10° is worse, than from 
119 
10° to 30° when the position is slightly improved. 
If the native engages in trade pertaining to'elephants or liquor, 
intoxicants, etc., it will bring money. He resorts to all kinds of 
low and underhand dealings, such as smuggling of gold, or other 
unfair practices for earning money. Unless other planets are 
strong, he does not get name and fame. He lacks in enthusiasm 
but talks volubly. The native may meet many frustrations in life; 
he travels much; his expenditure is heavy; is in the company of 
low people. He earns a living by dealing in base materials, such 
as iron; is envied by others; attached to other's wives; is not very 
clean; is hostile and suffers at the hands of the government. 
If the Sun is exact in 10th degree, this is a strong argument for 
indigent circumstances and the evil influences are at their peak; 
but if the longitude occupied is 0° to 3° 20', the evil influence is 
mitigated in some measure. If, however, the Sun tenants any degree 
from 20° to 23° 20', the evil influences described for the Sun in 
Libra are not felt and the Sun's Dasha and Antardasha yield good 
results. 
Sun in Scorpio 
The native has success in the latter half of life. There is no 
achievement of ambitions in the first half, when the pace of pro- 
gress is very slow. The native is very learned, but there is a streak 
of cruelty in him. He is courageous; does not stick to truth; may 
earn from poison or poisonous drugs. The native has a fiery tem- 
per; does not have much conjugal happiness. If other indications 
confirm, there is premature loss of his wife. The native himself 
is likely to be hurt by fire, weapons or poison. The native is 
avaricious and quarrelsome; very vindictive; strikes his opponent 
in a subtle and secret manner like the scorpion which stings 
with its tail. 
If the Sun occupies any degree between 3° 20' and 6° 40' or 
13° 20' to 16° 40', the Dasha and Antardasha of the Sun are 
much better. If the degree occupied is 10° to 13° 20', the result 
of the Sun's Dasha or Antardasha is evil. 
Sun in Sagittarius 
The native has a broad chest, a fully developed body and much 
stamina. He is intelligent, devoted to gods and Brahmans. He 
obliges his kith and kin. He is wealthy, respected by the clans, 
120 
unions of people and also by the government. The native can be 
clever in the use of arms and in training elephants. He may be a 
good physician or artisan or well up in arts and crafts. The native 
is very wealthy. The above good effects are felt in gaiter measure 
if the longitude of the Sun is 0° to 3° 20' or 13° 20' to 16° 40' 
or 26° 40' to 30°, in which case the Dasha and Antardasha also 
show very good results. But if the degree tenanted is 20° to 
23° 20', much of the good effects described for the Sun in this 
sign are devalued and the Dasha or Antardasha also proves un- 
favourable. 
Sun in Capricorn 
The native indulges in low acts; he proves a bad tradesman; 
is not very learned nor rich; avaricious; wants to appropriate other 
people's money by unfair means; is unhappy when other people 
get, success and prosper. 
The native is timid and has not much stamina; is fond of 
walking and travelling; is devoid of help and support from his 
relations; is of a fickle mind. His digestive powers are good; he 
engages in a variety of work and earns by means not very 
commendable. 
The above unfavourable effects are greatly lessened if the longi- 
tude of the Sun is 0° to 3° 20'. If the planet is between 23° 20' 
and 26° 40' of the sign it is still better and shows markedly good 
results. If the longitude tenanted is 10° to 13° 20', most of the 
ill effects do not manifest themselves and the results as well as 
the Dasha and Antardasha prove positively beneficial. 
Sun in Aquarius 
The native resorts to low acts; has no happiness from his sons; 
does not prosper and is devoid of wealth; is liable to heart 
troubles, particularly if Aquarius be the rising sign (ascendant). 
The native is . not even-tempered; is a back-biter; is not very 
straight forward in his dealings. His friendship is fickle and he 
proves an unreliable friend; is not very comely. But the native 
has great stamina and is also voluble in irrelevant talk. The native 
does not feel happy. 
The above effects will be worse if the Sun occupies any longi- 
tude between 0° and 3° 20, but the position is much improved 
if the Sun is between 13° 20' and 16° 40'. If the Sun tenants any 
121 
degree between 20° and 23° 20', the planet's general effects are 
positively good. So also his Dasha and Antardasha. 
Sun in Pisces 
The native has good friends and is loyal to them; gains money 
and comforts due to love with ladies by whom the native is 
favoured" is intelligent; annihilates a host of enemies; is wealthy 
and ears_ name and fame. He has good sons and servants, but 
diseases of the private part; has brothers. The native can earn 
much money by dealing in aqueous products or goods across the 
water or anything connected with water. There is liability to 
scandal. 
The good effects are maximum and the Dasha and Antardasha 
yield good results if the longitude of the Sun is 3° 20' to 6° 40' 
or between 26° 40' to 30°. If, however, the Sun occupies any 
degree between 10° and 13° 20', much of the good effects des- 
cribed are devalued and the planet's periods also prove 
unfavourable. 
MOON IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 
Before describing the effect of the Moon in various signs, we 
must emphasise that in case of the Moon, the Pakshabala, which 
is a Sanskrit word, is very important and this must first be 
explained. 
Pakshabala. A month is divided into two fortnights—the 
bright half of the month, when the Moon is waxing, and the dark 
half of the month when the Moon is waning. 
(i) The Moon is considered strong when he is 90° or more 
away from the Sun on either side. 
He is considered weak if the distance of Moon from the Sun, 
on either side, is less than 90°. 
A waxing Moon is considered auspicious and strong. A waning 
Moon is weak, malefic and inauspicious. 
Other writers divide the influence into three categories as 
counted from the Sun. 
(1) If the Moon is beyond 120° on either side of the Sun, he 
is ordinarily good. 
(2) If the Moon is from 120° to 180°, he is very good and 
strong. 
122 
(3) If the Moon is within 0° to 60° on either side of the Sun. 
he is weak. 
Moon in Association with Other Planets 
There is a certain element of give and take when two planets 
combine in a sign or aspect each other. It is common experience 
that if two vessels one containing hot water and the other cold 
are placed in close contact, the hot water does not remain so hot 
and the cold'water not so cold. When two chemicals are mixed, 
at times a new chemical is formed. So it is with planetary in- 
fluences. 
But of all the planets, the Moon and the Mercury are most 
receptive and the Moon very easily absorbs the qualities of other 
planets and so the results described below may be modified 
favourably or adversely according as this planet is associated with 
or aspected by benefits or malefics. This principle applies to all 
the planets, but as stated above, applies to the Moon in greater 
measure. 
High and Low Tide 
When the Moon occupies any degree between the ascendant 
and the cusp of the fourth house or between the cups of the 
seventh and the tenth, there is low tide; but when the Moon is 
located between the cusps of the fourth and the seventh, or bet- 
ween the cusps of the tenth and the ascendant, there is high tide. 
The Moon at high tide is strong. The Moon at low tide is 
weak. 
Moon in Aries 
Good complexion, wealthy, devoid of happiness from brothers, 
courageous, voluptuous, weak knees, bad nails, hair not 'good, 
several children, round eyes, loving, afraid of water, veins pro- 
minent, marks of wounds or boils on the body; under the influ- 
ence of his wife. 
If the longitude of the Moon is between 0° to 6° 40' or 10° to 
13° 20', he shows good results and if the Pakshabala*is also 
good, he will show better results and his Dasha and Antardasha 
will show good effect. If the longitude tenanted is 23° 20' to 
• Pakshabalais the over-riding factor to determine the strength of the 
Moon. 
123 
26° 40', much of the good results will be devalued; the native 
will be timid and the Dasha and Antardasha will also be un- 
favourable. if the Pakshabalais also weak. 
Moon in Taurus 
Broad chest, generous in giving, plenty of curly hair, voluptu- 
ous. famous, adorable looks, enjoys well, has more daughters 
than sons; eyes like those of a bull; gait like that of a goose, is 
happy during the middle one-third and last one-third of life; the 
waist, feet, shoulders, knees and face are broad with a thick neck; 
some mark* on one side of the body; has the quality of 
forbearance. 
Obviously it is better to have the Moon from 0° to 3° than in 
the rest of the sign. If however the Moon is between 13° 20' to 
16° 40' or 20° to 23° 20', then also the planet shows excellent 
results. 
Moon in Gemini 
Broad limbs; prominent nose; dark eyes (obviously this would 
not apply to people of the West), well up in amorous arts, poetic, 
enjoys luxuries; attractive looks, adorable, with humorous speech, 
intelligent; prominent veins on the body; over-sexed; under the 
influence of his wife; is brought up by a lady other than his 
mother or may have two mothers, has friends among impotent 
or imbecile persons. 
Many of the good qualities described above are devalued if 
the degree tenanted is 3° 20' to 6° 40'; but the Dasha or Antar- 
dasha proves good if the Moon is from 23° 20' to 30° 
Moon in Cancer 
Prosperous; comfortable house; fond of walking and travelling; 
having a love for astrology; amorous; grateful; minister of a 
king, lives at a place other than his native home-land; too much 
imagination running riot, thick neck, fond of good dwelling 
places and tanks, rivers, sea-side and flowers. There is a cycle of 
waxing and waning in his career. 
The Moon would show particularly good results if between 
0° to 3°, 20'. If between 13° 20' and 16° 40', the good effects are 
at their minimum; the native will be timid and the Dasha or 
Antardasha does not prove so effective. 
124 
Moon in Leo 
Broad chest; thick bones; very light and scanty hair on the 
body; large face and throat, eyes with yellowish tinge' and not 
very large; does not get on well with women, if a non-vegetarian, 
is fond of meat; suffers from hunger, thirst, stomach troubles 
and pain in the teeth; generous in giving; sharp tempered; has a 
few sons; fond of towns and forests; under the influence cif? his 
mother; has a dignified look; is courageous; engages in Varied 
work. 
If the Moon occupies 10° to 16° 40', it shows better results; 
but if the longitude tenanted is 23° 20' to 26° 40', much of 
the good results described above are devalued. The Dasha and 
Antardasha show the same difference in quality. 
Moon in Virgo 
Flirtatious, long arms; soft and adorable body and face; good 
eyes, ears and teeth; learned; sweet speech; sticks to truth and 
purity; persevering; engaged in other people's work; forbearing; 
prosperous; compassionate; has more daughters than sons. 
It is better to have the Moon between 13° 20' to 16° 40' or 
between 20° to 23° 20' or between 26° 40' to 30° when better 
results are obtained. 
Moon in Libra 
Broad chest; prominent nose; lean body and face; attached to 
more than one woman; benefit from cattle and land; very wealthy; 
valorous; active in work; devoted to gods and Brahmans; sticks 
to purity; generous in giving; does good to relations. 
The results are better if the longitude tenanted by Moon is 0° to 
3° 20' or 23° 20' to 26° 40'; so judge the Dasha and Antardasha 
on similar basis. If between 3° 20' and 6° 40', good effects are 
devalued, particularly if the Pakshabala*is lacking. 
Moon in Scorpio 
Avaricious; round thighs and calves; hard body; small chin 
and nails; beautiful eyes; prominent veins; big belly; does not 
have much faith in religion; inclined to acts of cruelty; thievish 
disposition; engaged in work; clever and capable: probable liai- 
sons with wives of others; proud or intoxicated; overbearing; 
* Never ignore Pakshabala, when judging Moon. 
125 
prosperous; devoid of relations or not on good terms with them; 
suffers financial penalty at the hands of the Government. 
It is better to have Moon from 0° to 3° 20' when good effects 
are augmented and unfavourable owners mitigated. If the longi- 
tude tenanted is 13° 20' to 16° 40', then also the position is im- 
proved. Keep this also in mind when judging the Dasha and 
Antardasha. 
Moon in Sagittarius 
Bent body; round eyes; broad chest and waist; long arms; 
high shoulders; large neck, strong body; prominent throat and 
nose; well built body; courageous; grateful; eloquent in speech; 
well up in artisan's work; likes to stay near sea-coast, river or 
water; affectionate with relations. 
The Moon shows much better results if the longitude occupied 
is 3° 20' to 6° 40' or 10° to 13° 20' or 26° 40' to 30°. Much of 
the good effects are devalued if the Moon is between 23° 20' and 
26° 40', so judge the Dasha and Antardasha. 
Moon in Capricorn 
Prominent veins; tallish; lean body; good eyes; round calves; 
large neck; prominent ears; poetic; connoisseur of singing; afraid 
of cold; cool tempered; religious; sticks to truth; famous; cruel 
hearted; shameless; probable liaison with an elder's wife (look 
to other indications as well); not very enthusiastic. 
The Moon would show comparatively better results if occuping 
any degree between 0° to 3° 20' or 13° 20' to 16° 40' or 20° to 
23° 20'. Judge the Dasha and A ntardasha accordingly. 
Moon in Aquarius 
Prominent nose; dry skin; large hands and feet; large head; 
large face and waist; poor eyes; fond of and clever in artisanship; 
ill-tempered; inclined to drink; devoid of religion; may produce 
sons by wives of others; incurs enmity with good people; wicked; 
indolent; suffers from sorrows and is poor. 
It is better to' have the Moon between 13° 20' and 16° 40' or 
23° 20' to 26° 40' when the evil would in some measure be 
mitigated and the Dasha and Antardasha would also show com- 
paratively better results. But if the longitude tenanted is 3° 20' 
to 6° 40', the Moon will be weaker and as such, more adverse. 
126 
Moon in Pisces 
Handsome body; large head; -gets- authority if engaged in 
works of arts, artisanship or crafts; inclined to get into a temper 
though generally good tempered; learned; connoisseur of singing; 
has a religious bent of mind; attached to many young women; 
under the influence of his wife; serves the Government; leads 
a comfortable life; happy; may get sudden or buried wealth or 
treasure or inherits; inclined to travel by water; interested in coun- 
tries and products beyond the seas; generous in giving. 
The Moon between 0° and 3° 20' or 26° 40' to 30° will be 
stronger for the good and show better results radically as well 
as during his periods. If the planet occupies a degree between 
13° 20' and 16° 40', much of the good effects described above 
will be devalued. 
MARS IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 
Mars in Aries 
Liable to hurt in the body or wounds; courageous; having 
much stamina; fond of battle; truthful; fond of walking or travell- 
ing; strongly sexed; having thievish tendencies; generous in 
giving; respected by the king, government; leader of a section of 
the army or head of an institution; wealthy; owner of cattle; if 
engaged in trade, success therein. This is an excellent position 
by sign endowing the native with heroic spirit and fine martial 
qualities. 
Even in Aries it is better if the planet is between 0° to 10°. 
Mars would be particularly strong if occupying any degree between 
0° to 3° 20' or 23° 20' to 26° 40' where he shows excellent results. 
Despite being in Aries, if he occupies a degree between 10° and 
13° 20', many of the fine qualities would become grosser, e.g., 
instead of being a hero, the native may be quarrelsome. 
Mars in Taurus 
Fond of songs and music; is not self-confident; apprehensive; 
does not have a stable position in life; well-dressed; well-groomed; 
cruel; talkative; speaks harshly; does not have several sons; not 
wealthy; envied by many. The native is under the influence of 
women; attached to the wives of others; antagonistic to friends; 
127 
sinful and cunning; maintains a large family, but creates split in 
the family. 
If Mars occupies 0° to 3° 20' the native will have minimum 
of bad qualities and maximum of good ones. So also tenancy of 
any degree between 10° and 16° 40' is good. But if the planet 
is any where between 20° and 23° 20', the disqualifications are 
more marked, and the good qualities at the lowest ebb. Judge the 
Dasha and Antardasha accordingly.* 
Mars in Gemini 
Attractive appearance; has much bodily vigour and strength; 
can put up with severe strain, has several sons; without friends; 
grateful; clever in poetry, dancing, singing and music or is a. 
connoisseur of these and artisanship requiring mechanical dexterity; 
fearless; miserly; wealthy; fond of travelling abroad. The native 
engages in a variety of work; obliges sons and friends. Such a 
native can be clever in military strategy as well. 
The planet is stronger for the good if occupying a degree 
between 3° 20' and 6° 40' or 10° to 13° 20' or 20° to 23° 20' or 
26° 40' to 30° and shows much better results in his Dasha and 
Antardasha. 
Mars in Cancer 
Intelligent; restless and worried due to some chronic ailment. 
The native is soft and can be prevailed upon; wicked; gain from 
agriculture; inclined to live in others' houses. 
Grateful; without friends and wealth; earns through boats and 
ships or goods transported by them; may get a government scholar- 
ship in boyhood or be supported by some one other than his 
family. There is a cycle of wealth and lack of luck; good health 
and ailments alternate. 
Evil influences would be mitigated in great measure and good 
ones augmented if the longitude occupied is between 0° and 3° 
20' or 13° 20' and 16° 40' or 20° to 23° 20'. On this basis judge 
the Dasha and Antardasha also. 
* At places, it has not been stated that Dasha and Antardasha should 
be judged accordingly. But where location between certain degrees has 
been stated to be good or evil, it has to be taken into consideration in 
delineating the Dasha or Antardasha effects. 
128 
Mars in Leo 
Strong body; fearless; has great stamina; overbearing and in- 
tolerable of others; fond of roaming in forests and of hunting; 
capable of putting up with hard labour; devoid of wealth; little 
happiness from wife (or premature death of wife); has only a 
few sons, inclined to appropriate other people's wealth; affectionate 
to sons of others; persevering in work. 
If Mars is between 0° to 3° 20' or 13° 20' to 16° 40' or 23° 20' 
to 26° 40', the good effects are increased and the evil ones 
mitigated, but if between 10° to 13° 20', the reverse is the case. 
Mars in Virgo 
Not courageous; learned; fears opponents; respected by gentle- 
men; very wealthy; fond of sex and singing; speaks softly and 
pleasingly; incurs heavy expenditure; clever in artisanship; reli- 
gious; fond of baths and fragrant applications; wealthy and with 
many sons. 
It is better to have Mars between 0° to 3° 20' or 10° to 13° 20' 
or 26° 40' to 30° where he is strong and the influence is improved 
for the good; but if between 20° and 23° 20', the good influences 
are devalued in some measure and evil ones augmented. 
Mars in Libra 
Good appearance; talkative; timid, cunning; harsh; antagonistic 
to friends; liaisons with women; liking for drink; wastes money 
over wine and women and is under their influence; defective in 
some limb; fond of fight; likelihood of premature death of first 
wife (look to other indications also in the nativity and also wife's 
horoscope). 
If the planet occupies 0° to 6° 40' or 10° to 13° 20' or 20° to 
23° 20' good effects predominate and the evil ones are at their 
minimum. 
Mars in Scorpio 
Marks of wounds or those caused by fire on the body; the native 
is the head of some department or institution or a businessman 
with a flourishing trade of his own; rich; respected by the govern- 
ment; may suffer from poison (like food poisoning); clever; fond 
of giving a fight; vindictive; indulges in sinful acts; intent on 
harming his opponents; may gain money by underhand means. 
129 
If the planet occupies 0° to 3° 20' the good effects are 
devalued greatly, but if the planet is between any of the following 
degrees, more good effects are felt and the evil ones show the 
least results : 13° to 16° 40 or 20° to 23° 20'. 
Mars in Sagittarius 
Harsh speech; dependence on others; may bear marks of 
wounds on the body; evil intentions; fearless; a good fighter; has 
many enemies; occupies a high position in government or large 
institutions; famous; a few sons; wealth and happiness lessened 
due to the native's uncontrolled temper; attains happiness and 
comfort only after hard labour. 
The best degrees for the planet to occupy are 0° to 3° 20' or 
23° 20' to 30°, when the good effects will be predominant. If the 
planet tenants any degree between 10° to 13° 20', the good effect 
will be at the minimum and the unfavourable ones will be 
stronger. 
Mars in Capricorn 
Plenty of wealth; several sons; a king* or equal to a king; 
healthy; wise; famous; head of a section of an army or a depart- 
ment or institution; independent; victorious in undertakings; 
patronises his relations; courteous; has much paraphernalia. 
Very good results are felt if the planet occupies any degree 
* When these texts were written there were thousands of rajas (kings) 
in India. Some of them had only a hundred acres of land or an income of 
one thousand rupees per month, which is now the income of a labourer in 
the U.S.A. Millions of people are born when Mars is in Capricorn and 
surely now millions cannot become kings or equal to kings. But these are 
the actual expressions used by Varaha Mihir. While aware of the poetic 
way of expression, we have made an effort to give a gist of the ancient 
texts throughout this book so that readers can get a taste of the actual 
ancient recipe and not the modern cooked up version. We want the 
readers who do not know Sanskrit to have an insight into the original. 
Nor have we hesitated to call a spade a spade. Many writers convey 
the same meaning in sophisticated terms. If the texts say poor, say poor, 
and not describe this saying 'not wealthy' so, also, if the texts describe 
as 'attached to many women and having liaisons with them' why say 
fond of female company'? To interpret these texts against the back- 
ground of a native and to edit the views has been left to the reader 
himself. One sparrow does not make a spring nor is one influence a 
deciding factor. All the influences latent and patent have to be synthesised 
to arrive at the true results. 
A.-9 
130 
between 10° to 13° 20', and most excellent results if the planet 
occupies 0° to 3° 20'. But good results are at their minimum if 
the degree occupied is 20° to 23° 20'. 
Mars in Aquarius 
Rough hair on body; not pleasing in appearance; cruel; not 
wealthy; afflicted with sorrows; wanders aimlessly; untruthful; 
earns livelihood with difficulty; may lose money by gambling in 
races or speculation or due to the native's own malice and disho- 
nesty; devoid of respect for and courtesy towards others; envious; 
fond of drinking. 
The evil effects will be mitigated in some measure if the degree 
occupied is 3° 20' to 6° 40' or 10° to 16° 40' or 20° to 23° 20'. 
Mars in Pisces 
Fearless; has many enemies; occupies a good position in life; 
well-known; suffers deep sorrows; ailments of the body; crooked 
in views; sharp tempered; insults seniors and Brahmans; has 
a few sons who are not intelligent or do not progress well in 
life; suffers loss of wealth due to his own deceitful conduct; lives 
at a place other than his homeland. 
The worst side of the effects will be felt if the planet occupies 
any degree from 0° to 3° 20'. If the planet tenants any degree 
from 13° 20' to 16° 40' or 20° to 23° 20' or 26° 40' to 30°, the 
evil effects will be mitigated considerably. 
MERCURY IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 
Mercury in Aries 
Lean body; fond of gambling, food and drinks; also of music 
and dance; thievish tendencies; has not, much faith in gods; cun- 
ning; given to untruth; does not have a good wife; diplomatic; 
of a quarrelling disposition; well up in cartography, drawing or 
painting; labours hard but loses wealth; devoid of wealth; may 
incur debts; may have to live in confinement. 
If the planet tenants any of the following degrees much of the 
evil influence described above is mitigated: * 0° to 3° 20'; 6° 40' 
to 10°; 16° 40' to 20°. 
* The Planets for which good effects have been described show good 
effects during their Mahadashas or Antardashas and vice versa. But the 
131 
Mercury in Taurus 
Respects teachers or his religious preceptors, father, etc.; 
several sons; plenty of money; good conjugal happiness; generous 
in giving; clever; famous; learned; of fixed determination; jocular; 
fond of physical exercises, dress, ornaments and flowers; talks 
endearingly; accepts advice. 
The best effects are shown if the planet occupies any degree 
between 13° 20' to 20° or 26° 40' to 30°. Least good effects 
come to pass if the degree occupied is 6° 40' to 10° 
Mercury in Gemini 
Very eloquent and good at narration; at times argumentative; 
learned and clever in the fine arts; speaks sweetly; humorous; 
dresses well; independent; wealthy; generous; actively engaged 
in work; leads a happy and comfortable life; may have two wives 
or twin sons. 
The best degrees for Mercury to occupy are 26° 40' to 30° 
when the qualities will show at their best. If the degrees tenanted 
are 16° 40' to 20°. a great deal of the good effects will be 
devalued. 
Mercury in Cancer 
Intelligent, very active and talkative; lives at a place other than 
his homeland; fond of women and songs; loss of money due to 
enmity with wife or other women; not good tempered; engaged 
in various works; antagonistic to his own people; gain from water 
and also products of water or connected with water or goods 
across the seas; famous due to his family. 
. The best degrees for the planet to occupy are 0° to 3° 20' or 
'6° 40' to 10°, where he will show the maximum good effects. If 
the planet occupies a degree between 26° 40' to 30°, he will be 
less good and show more unfavourable trends. 
Mercury in Leo 
A wanderer; not truthful; devoid of wisdom and dexterity in the 
fine arts; does not have a good memory; devoid of good actions; 
sign position is only one factor. A Dasha or Antardasha shows its effects 
according to the position of the planet in the sign, house, lordship of the 
house, aspect of or conjunction with the planet. The same principles apply 
to Sun, Moon and all other planets. 
132 
an unfavourable factor for longevity of brother (or the native 
may be antagonistic to his brothers and family); an adverse factor 
for issues; does not have a good wife or happiness through her; 
desirous of female company; independent, famous and if Mercury 
is strong and well aspected then wealthy, otherwise poor. 
The best degrees for Mercury to occupy are 6° 40' to 10°, and 
13° 20' to 20° when most of the unfavourable features will not 
be felt or very feebly felt. 
Mercury in Virgo 
Religious; of a forgiving nature; endowed with many good 
qualities; happy; clever; well mannered; sweet in speech; eloquent; 
good logical or argumentative abilities; fearless in debates; a 
literary critic; proficient in the sciences, arts and crafts; earns the 
respect of friends; occupies a senior position; sexual vigour less 
than normal. 
Even in this sign, Mercury will show better effects if occupying 
any degree between 16° 40' and 20° and the best result if between 
26° 40' to 30°. The poorest effects will be shown if between 
6° 40' to 10°. 
Mercury in Libra 
Generous; clever in speech; devoted to God; respectful to 
seniors; hospitable as a host; displays much pretended love for 
friends; spends discriminately on projects for gain of wealth; 
inclined to have businesses at various places in different direc- 
tions; intent upon earning money; attached to wife and sons. 
In this sign, Mercury will show least good effects if tenanting 
any degree from 16° 40' to 20°; the maximum favourable results 
will occur if occupying 0° to 3P 20' or 26° 40' to 30°. 
Mercury in Scorpio 
Not truthful; not wise; avaricious; having thievish tendencies; 
without wealth; indebted; materialistic in outlook; not much faith 
in God; fond of good food, drinks and betting. He does not have 
a good wife or is attached to an unworthy woman. Generally his 
friends are of a lower rank. The native is harsh in dealing with 
others and may indulge in unfair practices. The financial returns 
are not in proportion to the labour and effort put in. He does not 
win approbation of good people. 
133 
In this sign, the worst effects will be felt if the degrees occupied 
by the planet are 26° 40' to 30°. But if the degree occupied is 
6° 40' to 10° or 13° 20' to 16° 40' the least evil results will be 
experienced. 
Mercury in Sagittarius 
Very intelligent; well informed; famous; endowed with many 
good qualities; generous; courteous and courageous; clever in 
speech; may occupy an emiment position; may become a royal 
priest or a minister; well versed in writing and penmanship. The 
native is liked by the king or government. He may devote his 
time to religious affairs or teaching. 
Very good results will be felt if the degree tenanted is 6° 40' to 
10° or 16° 40' to 20° or 26° 40' to 30° and the least good effects 
will result if the degree tenanted is 23° 20' to 26° 40'. 
Mercury in Capricorn 
Poor; indebted; not intelligent; not endowed with outstanding 
qualities; serves others; good in crafts; does not dress well; has 
to put in much physical labour; various difficulties oppress him; 
he may not stick to truth; be a back biter; may be separated from 
Bandhus (relations); is always apprehensive; his mind feels 
cramped; may have dreams of pleasure and enjoyment. 
The worst effects will be felt if the degree occupied is 6° 40' 
to 10° and the evil effects will be at their minimum if the degree 
occupied is 0° to 3° 20' or 16° 40' to 20° or 26° 40' to 30°. 
Mercury in Aquarius 
Not fortunate; career of employment; his duties involve a heavy 
load of work; not clean; may acquire some wealth by means 
not above-board, but incurs debts; not very eloquent or intelligent 
but proficient in inferior artsmanship; very timid; has little enjoy- 
ment in life; oppressed by enemies; does not have a congenial 
wife. 
The worst effects will be felt if the degree tenanted is between 
3° 20' to 6° 40' or 16° 40' to 20° and the least unfavourable 
results will be experienced if the degree tenanted is between 
13° 20' to 16° 40' or 26° 40' to 30°. 
134 
Mercury in Pisces 
Excels his colleagues in rendering service to his master; not 
very learned in the arts or literature; clever in menial artsman- 
ship; good deeds liked by gentry; not firm in matters religious; 
poor; not happy in respect of children (at least for some time); 
has a good wife. 
The least good effects will be felt if the degree occupied is 
between 13° 20' to 16° 40', but the good results described will be 
felt if the planet tenants any degree from 6° 40' to 10° or 26° 40' 
to 30°. 
JUPITER IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 
Jupiter in Aries 
Head of an army or section of an army; blessed with wife and 
several sons; generous; has good servants; forgiving; overcomes 
others with his valour; endowed with many qualities; heavy 
expenditure; many enemies; his body may bear scars of wounds— 
in other words, he may be a hero of many battle--literally or 
figuratively speaking. The native has much stamina and is daring 
in deeds which bring him name and fame. If not in the army, 
he may command a dominating position in an institution. He 
would be a strict disciplinarian. 
The good effects will be felt at their maximum if the degree 
occupied is between 0° to 3° 20' or 10° to 13° 20' or 26° 40' to 
30°. 
Jupiter in Taurus 
Stout and large body; handsome; intelligent and wise; good 
health; sweet speech; happy; wealthy; dresses well; is courteous 
and popular; diplomatic; endowed with a sacrificing spirit; has 
good -sons; attached to his own wife; owns cattle; gains from 
agriculture; has valuable possessions. The native is diplomatic; 
pays homage to gods, Brahmans and cows. 
Poorest effects will be felt if the planet occupies 0° to 3° 20'. 
The good effects described will be at their maximum if the de- 
gree tenanted is between 6° 40' to 10° or 13° 20' to 16° 40' or 
20° to 23° 20'. 
135 
Jupiter in Gemini 
Learned; very intelligent; good memory; a poet; clever in arts 
and sciences; religious; respected by seniors as well as relations; 
happy; has sons and friends; gets good food and good clothes 
and has the necessities for comfortable living; keeps part of his 
money in deposit; has many auspicious celebrations in the family; 
may become a minister or counsellor or adviser. The native is 
very active and diligently engages in work. 
In this sign, Jupiter will be at his best if occupying any degree 
between 6° 40' to 10° or 16° 40' to 20° or 26° 40' to 30°, but 
the least good will ensue if between 10° to 13° 20'. 
Jupiter in Cancer 
Handsome, wise and learned; sweet temperament; religious; 
strong; very wealthy; possesses precious jewellery; has a good wife 
and good sons; well endowed with the comforts of life. The 
native obliges a host of good people and is noted for truth and 
righteous conduct and earns a good name and fame for his magni- 
ficent deeds. 
In this sign, the planet will show the maximum good effects if 
occupying any degree between 0° to 3° 20' or 16° 40' to 20° or 
26° 40' to 30°, and the worst effects if tenanting any degree bet- 
ween 20° to 23° 20'. 
Jupiter in Leo 
Good personality; strong and compact body; intelligent; learned; 
virtuous; having good qualities of head and heart; famous; 
devoted to gods; happiness from wife and sons; noted for good 
acts; head of an army or section of an army or institution. The 
native has much stamina and the enmities incurred last long. He 
is a loving friend. Fond of forts, forests and mountainous regions. 
The planet will show maximum good results if occupying any 
degree between 10° and 16° 40' or 26° 40' to 30°. 
Jupiter in Virgo 
Good memory; of fixed determination; courteous; inclined to 
virtues; religious; generous; clever in execution of work; fond of 
scents and flowers, has all the comforts of life; has good sons 
and friends; gains money by his erudition, arts and crafts or work 
connected with them. The native may rise to a high position in 
136 
life, such as that of a minister or counsellor. 
The planet will show the least good effects if tenanting a de- 
gree from 0° to 3° 20'. If, however, occupying a degree between 
6° 40' to 10° or 20° to 23° 20' or 26° 40' to 30° he will show 
maximum good effects. 
Jupiter in Libra 
Good memory; good actions; pleasing personality; engaged in 
pursuit of learning; fond of good clothes; comfortable living; very 
wealthy; happy; liked by others; has several good sons and good 
friends. The native himself is a friend of businessmen, lives at a 
place other than his homeland; may gain money connected with 
jugglery, dance, etc. (in the present context, theatres, films, etc.). 
The native attains a high position in life. He is religious, and 
devoted to gods; is a hospitable host. 
The planet will be at its best if occupying a degree between 
0° and 3° 20' or 6° 40' to 10° or 16° 40' to 20° and will show 
the least good effect if between 10° and 13° 20'. 
Jupiter in Scorpio 
Strong and overpowering personality; of a forgiving tempera- 
ment; generous; happiness from wife, but the native may not have 
many sons. He helps in the construction of a temple or charitable 
or benevolent institution, but there is an element of show or pre- 
tensions in matters religious. The moral conduct may not be of 
high order. He occupies a respectable position but has to labour 
hard and has also some chronic ailment. If following the literary 
line, he would be a scholar and an author, clever but with a 
streak of vindictiveness. 
The best degrees to occupy in the sign are 0° to 3° 20' or 
13° 20' to 20° or 26° 40' to 30°, when the good qualities will 
show their best effects and the evil trails their least. But if the 
degree occupied is 20° to 23° 20', the reverse will be the case. 
Jupiter in Sagittarius 
Very intelligent; learned; wealthy; has good friends; generous; 
obliges others; will live at many places other than his homeland; 
visits holy places; will have good houses; occupies a high posi- 
tion such as a chieftain or a minister of a king. 
May be a professor or religious preceptor. In short, very good 
137 
results have been described for this and therefore the texts have 
not dilated upon the many happy effects that will be experienced. 
The best degrees for the planet to occupy will be 10° to 13° 20' 
or 26° 40' to 30°, where the maximum good effects would result. 
Jupiter in Capricorn 
A weak body; not intelligent. The native would have little 
money and little happiness; not much stamina or virility; will 
have to put in much hard labour for low financial returns; he has 
to run errands for others. He has several low traits of character; 
will have little sense of cleanliness, or love for his people, or 
compassion and his religious conduct will be at its lowest ebb; he 
lives at places other than his native one and is timid and 
melancholy. 
If occupying any degree between 0° to 3° 20' or 6° 40' to 10° 
or 20° to 23° 20', the effects will not be so bad. 
Jupiter in Aquarius 
One ancient text states that Jupiter in Aquarius will show the 
same results as in Cancer, but according to another, the native 
is hard hearted, a back-biter, avaricious, not of noble tempera- 
ment, puts in much unproductive labour in works connected with 
water or artisanship. He is not intelligent, suffers from a chronic 
ailment and destroys his wealth or lessens his income by his 
speech. He prefers the company of low people but becomes the 
head of his group. He may have liaison with a female related to 
the native. 
If Jupiter occupies any degree between 13° 20' to 20°, the 
position would be improved, but if he tenants a degree from 10° 
to 13° 20', the effects described will be at their worst. 
Jupiter in Pisces 
The native is learned and is not vain; he is respected by his 
friends; he cannot be overpowered by others; is of a fixed deter- 
mination in the execution of work; he has much quiet stamina; 
earns praise, name and fame for his work and conduct. He is 
very wealthy or the minister of a king or the head of a section of 
the army. In other words, he occupies a good position in life and 
is well off. The native is good in dealing with others and or with 
matters of educational and military strategy. 
138 
If the planet occupies any degree between 0° to 3° 20' or 
16° 40' to 20° or 26° 40' to 30°, the good effects will be at their 
maximum, but if the degree tenanted is 20° to 23° 20', the reverse 
will be the case. 
VENUS IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 
Venus in Aries 
Having many vices or bad qualities; liaisons with other's wife; 
fond of prostitutes, forests and mountains; may be confined due 
to a woman; not large hearted; cruel at heart; voluble in speech 
but not reliable; quarrels or enters into litigations on account of 
attachment to a woman and loses wealth as a result thereof; brings 
discredit to one's family The native has a thievish mental apti- 
tude but occupies a good position in life all the same; in old age 
may become night blind. 
If the planet occupies any degree between 0° and 6° 40' or 
20° to 23° 20', the evil influence will be mitigated in some measure. 
The reverse will be the case if occupying a degree between 16° 40' 
to 20°. 
Venus in Taurus 
Comely appearance; strong; has the company of a large number 
of women; gains from agriculture; fond of good clothes, scents 
and flowers; gains from cows; fearless; generous; helps and main- 
tains his relations; wealthy; learned; noted for his many virtues; 
famous; obliges good people; respected by the king or govern- 
ment and his own group of people, whom he heads. 
The planet shows better results if tenanting any degree between 
6° 40' to 10° or 13° 20' to 16° 40' and not such good results if 
between 26° 40' and 30°. 
Venus in Gemini 
Handsome; over-sexed; loved by others; a gentleman; fond 
of music and dance; well up in the arts and sciences; clever at 
writing and painting; sincerely affectionate; wealthy; engages in 
government work; devoted to gods and Brahmans. 
The planet shows very good effects if between 0° to 3° 20' or 
16° 40' to 20° or 23° 20' to 30°. 
139 
Venus in Cancer 
Good looking, strong; amorous; may have two wives; tactful; 
intelligent; a chief person in his group; having all the desirable 
necessities' for comfort; religiously inclined; suffers from chronic 
ailments caused by excessive indulgence with women and drinks; 
is at a disadvantage on account of some blemish in the family. 
The native is soft and does not have much stamina or powers of 
resistance; is timid and inclined to seek favours or money from 
others; takes sorrows deeply to heart. 
If the planet tenants any degrees between 0° to 3° 20' or 10° to 
13o'20' or 26° 40' to 30°, the results will be good, if it occupies 
a degree between 6° 40' and 10°, the good effects are at their 
lowest. 
Venus in Leo 
Not much stamina; fond of Bandhus (relations); has unusual 
happiness; also sorrows; does good to and obliges others; liked 
by his religious preceptors and Brahmans; not much worried; 
adores ladies and derives pleasure, happiness and money from 
them; married in a high family; has a few sons. 
The planet shows good effects if occupying any degree between 
3° 20' to 6° 40' or 13° 20' to 16° 40' or 20° to 23° 20', but if it 
occupies degrees between 16° 40' and 20°, the good effects will be 
at their lowest ebb. 
Venus in Virgo 
Poor, humble, low acts, not wise, soft, clever, serves others; 
connoisseur of the arts; speaks sweetly like a damsel; longs for 
love affairs, loves wicked women; does not have much happiness 
or luxuries; is taken as a scholar in religious congresses at holy 
places. 
In this sign the best degrees to tenant are 6° 40' to 10° or 
13° 20' to 16° 40' or 26° 40' to 30° when the evil effects will be 
mitigated and the good ones augmented. 
Venus in Libra 
Handsome, courageous, learned, strong and fearless; clever in 
defending and protecting his interests; active in work even in 
difficult ones; very wealthy; fond of flowers and clothes; gets a 
good name due to devotion to gods and Brahmans; inclined 
140 
to live at a place other than his native land; earns money by 
hard labour. The native is well liked in society and the 
state and becomes famous. 
In this sign, the planet will produce better results if tenanting 
any degree between 0° to 3° 20' or 16° 40' to 20° or 23° 20' to 
26° 40'. 
Venus in Scorpio 
Very cruel and envious; irreligious; very talkative and wicked; 
devoid of brothers; attains good position; enmity with a woman 
of loose character; clever in damaging the names of others; 
indebted; poor; not good tempered; suffers from disease of the 
private part or from some hidden disease. Such a native succeeds 
in defeating his opponent. He may, by favouring a lady, oppose 
or enter into litigation with another party and thereby damage 
his own prosperity. The cumulative effect of this is that the native 
brings discredit to his own family. 
If the planet occupies any degree between 10° to 16° 40' or 
26° 40' to 30°, many of the evil effects described above will be 
at their minimum, but if the degree tenanted is 6° 40' to 10°, the 
native will be poor, but his temperament will be better and he 
will feel the worst effects described for the planet in the sign. 
Venus in Sagittarius 
Tall; well developed body; handsome; loved by all; learned; 
very clever; fond of dressing up; earns wealth and has the neces- 
sities for comfort due to righteous and good actions; rises to an 
eminent position, such as, that of a minister; possesses cows; 
very wealthy; is respected by people and society. 
If the planet occupies any degree between 3° 20' to 6° 40' or 
20° to 23° 20' or 26° 40' to 30°, the good effects described above 
will be at their maximum, but if the degree occupied is any de- 
gree from 0° to 3° 20' or 16° 40' to 20° or 23° 20' to 26° 40', 
much of the good effects due to the position of the planet in the 
sign will be devalued. 
Venus in Capricorn 
Weak body, but good looking; may suffer from heart disease; 
not wise; always apprehensive; very sorrowful; avaricious; cun- 
ning in deceiving others by speaking lies for gain of money; 
141 
industrious but not sexually virile; his efforts end in frustration; 
sweats for others. The native is attached to an unworthy or elderly 
female; he is under considerable influence of his wife or other 
women. 
If the planet occupies any degree from 0° to 3° 20' or 6° 40' to 
10° or 13° 20' to 16° 40', the evil effects described above will be 
appreciably reduced, but if the planet tenants any degree between 
10° to 13° 20' or 26° 40' to 30°, the worst effects will come into 
force. 
Venus in Aquariur 
Good appearance; antagonistic to his sons, and seniors (father, 
etc.); agitated in mind; uneasy due to ailments; persistently enga- 
ges in work which does not yield the desired results; attached to 
another woman; irreligious; unclean; does not like baths; does not 
care for a well-groomed appearance; attached to an unworthy 
woman; under considerable influence of his wife or other women. 
If the planet occupies any degree from 0° to 3° 20' or 13° 20' 
to 20° or 23° 20' to 26° 40', the evil effects will be mitigated in 
some measure, but if the planet occupies any of the following 
degrees, the worst side of the influence will be experienced: 3° 20' 
to 6° 40' or 10° to 13° 20' or 20° to 23° 20'. 
Venus in Pisces 
Eloquent and very wise; sweet in speech; generous; clever; 
endowed with many good qualities; very famous; engages in big 
projects; very wealthy, defeats his opponents; a favourite of the 
king; occupies an eminent position; gains money from and the 
respect of good folk. 
The planet will show very good results if occupying any degree 
from 10° to 13° 20' or 26° 40' to 30°, but much of the good 
effects described will be devalued, if the degree tenanted is 6° 40' 
to 10° or 13° 20' to 16° 40'. 
SATURN IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 
Saturn in Aries 
Cruel, sharp tempered, not wise but garrulous; fiery; uses harsh 
language; impudent, envious, deceitful; poor and ill-dressed; has 
to labour hard; inclined to damage the interests of his relations; 
142 
fond of quarrelling. The native does not perform good acts but 
rather commits sinful acts, gets blamed for them and is condemn- 
ed by others. He has no friends; wanders aimlessly. 
The planet will shed much of his evil qualities if occupying any 
degree between 0° to 3° 20' or 26° 40' to 30°. If tenanting any 
degree between 20° to 23° 20', he may actually show good results; 
the latent evil traits will be sublimed. But if tenanting any degree 
between 23° 20' to 26° 40', he will evince the maximum evil traits. 
Saturn in Taurus 
Devoid of wealth; unrighteous conduct; his arguments are not 
logical; has bad friends; follows a career of service; constantly 
attached to women; a favourite of undesirable or elderly women 
and runs errands for them. He is not wise; is insulted; engaged 
in a variety of work. 
If the planet occupies any degree between 0° to 6° 40' or 13° 20' 
to 16° 40', the evil qualities will be much less pronounced. But 
if the planet tenants a degree between 10° and 13° 20' the worst 
effects will be felt. 
Saturn in Gemini 
Industrious; secretive; wicked; cruel; not good tempered; a 
hypocrite; not benevolently inclined; very active; may become 
accused in a criminal case; voluptuous; deceives others. The 
native at times receives insulting treatment; harbours ill feelings; 
fond of outdoor sports. He exceeds his sphere of work and may 
incur debts; occupies a good position with a large staff under 
him; not much happiness from sons. 
The planet shows good results if occupying any degree from 
0° to 3° 20' or 10° to 16° 40' or 26° 40' to 30°; the reverse is 
the case if the degree occupied is 3° 20' to 6° 40' or 20° to 23° 20.' 
Saturn in Cancer 
Good looking, but space in between teeth; poor; suffers 
sickness in childhood; intelligent; very soft; associates with 
important people; always restless; opposed to his relations; 
attains a good position in life; not good tempered, loses mother 
early in life; not much happiness from sons; impedes progress of 
others; enjoy luxuries at the cost of others. The middle part of 
life is better than the first one-third or the last one-third. 
143 
The planet shows comparatively better results if occupying the 
following degrees: 0° to 3° 20' or 10° to 13° 20' or 20° to 
26° 40.' Mostly evil results are felt if the degree occupied is 13° 
20' to 16° 40'. 
Saturn in Leo 
Not noble; condemned for evil actions; not good tempered; 
without happiness; without relations (or not on loving terms with 
them); clever in reading and writing; (without wife or lacking 
in conjugal happiness); earns by service; given to a career of 
low acts; full of latent anger; dispersed body due to putting in 
hard labour; sons a source of trouble to the native. 
The worst degrees for the planet to occupy in the sign are 
those between 0° to 3° 20' and 23° 20' to 26° 40', when the evil 
results felt will be at their maximum. But if the planet tenants 
any degree from 13° 20' to 16° 40' or 20° to 23° 20', most of the 
evil traits will not be felt or felt very feebly. 
Saturn in Virgo 
Very wicked; little hair on chin and cheeks; not wealthy; 
inclined to enjoy the hospitality of others; without shame; 
liaisons; not clever as an artisan; does not engage in productive 
work. The native is far-sighted and obliges 'others by doing 
good to them; little happiness from sons; heads an institution 
with a large staff, such as a police officer or works in the defence 
department. 
The best degrees for the planet to occupy are 0° to 6° 40' or 
26° 40' to 30°, where the good effects are predominant. If the 
planet occupies 10° to 13° 20', mostly evil results will be 
experienced. 
Saturn in Libra 
Endearing speech; intelligent; occupies a senior position among 
groups of people and respected in the village or town he resides 
in; very rich—equal to a king; earns money and respect by touring 
or contacts with foreign countries; can bank upon hoarded 
money; rises in life as age advances. The native is fond of 
associating with women of loose morals. 
Saturn if occupying any of the following degrees will show 
excellent results: 0° to 3° 20', 10° to 16° 40'. But if the planet 
144 
tenants a degree from 20° to 23° 20', much of the good effects 
described above will be devalued. 
Saturn in Scorpio 
Vain, cruel, envious, opposed to others, avaricious, fiery temper, 
very active; suffers from fire or poison; rich; inclined to appro- 
priate other persons' property; suffers many sorrows but out- 
wardly appears as if enjoying life. Liability to suffer confinement 
or physical chastisement or reprimands; may suffer heavy expendi- 
ture; depletion of energies arising out of a chronic ailment. 
If the planet occupies any degree from 10° to 16° 40' or 20° to 
26° 40', the evil effects will be mitigated, but if in any of the 
other degrees, there will be no such mitigation. 
Saturn in Sagittarius 
Religious; righteous conduct; not talkative; soft; very in- 
telligent; learned, good knowledge of the Shastras (Standard 
Hindu Books), clever in dealing with others; illustrious sons 
who bring credit to the father; enjoys wealth particularly in the 
last one-third part of life when he is much respected. The native 
may become head or leader of a village, town, section of army 
or have many employees under him; peaceful death. 
Excellent results will be produced if the planet occupies any 
degree from 20° to 23° 20' or 26° 40' to 30°, but much of the 
good effects described for the planet in this sign will be devalued 
if he occupies any degree from 0° to 3° 20' or 23° 20' to 26° 40' 
Saturn in Capricorn 
Learned; valorous; languid eyes; unclean body; famous; clever 
in execution of work; proficient in artisanship; occupies an 
eminent position in his own clan or family and respected by 
other groups also; generally lives at a place other than his 
native land; derives financial benefit from other person's wife; 
dotes upon his children. The native is wealthy and leads a 
comfortable life. 
The best degrees for the planet to occupy in this sign are 
between 0° to 6° 40' when the good effects will be at their 
maximum, and the worst degrees to tenant are 10° to 13° 20' 
where the good effects will be at their minimum and the un- 
favourable ones at their maximum. 
145 
Saturn in Aquarius 
Very untruthful; harsh in speech; indolent eyes; strong; fiery 
tempered; outwardly talks of philosophy and religion; gain from 
another person's wife; addicted to wine and women; tendency to 
deceive others; has bad friends; initiates a variety of work. The 
native is wealthy and occupies a good position in life. 
It Saturn occupies any degree from 0° to 3° 20' or 10° to 16° 
40', he will show comparatively better results, but if tenanting a 
degree between 20° and 23° 20', only evil results will follow. 
Saturn in Pisces 
Sober; a good diplomat; the native can be a good jeweller; 
chief among friends and relations; good wife, good sons; head 
of an institution, village or town; commands, respect and trust 
in government; wealthy; engaged in religious conduct; well- 
mannered; endowed with many good qualities. A good end to 
life and peaceful death. 
If occupying any degree between 10° to 13° 20' or 20° to 26° 40', 
very good results will be felt. The worst degrees to occupy are 
those between 13° 20' to 16° 40' when much of the good effects 
described will be devalued.* 
Rahu and Ketu 
The effects of Rahu and Ketu in the different signs need not be 
described in detail. They imbibe the characteristics of Saturn and 
Mars respectively, i.e., Rahu is like Saturn and Ketu like Mars. 
Rahu in Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Virgo Sagittarius and 
Pisces is favourable. 
Rahu and Ketu generally bestow the effects of the planets they 
are conjoined with. 
We shall now close this chapter with some concluding remarks 
on the mode of interpretation of the influence of the planets in 
the different signs. 
* As stated earlier, never forget that signs correspond to houses; Aries 
to first, Taurus to second and so on Thus, benefics in Taurus would 
increase wealth, in Libra give a good wife, in Sagittarius religiousness, 
prosperity and wealth and benefits connected with foreign lands and peo- 
ple. Saturn or Mars in Leo would give trouble from children or stomach 
ailments, in Capricorn, they would curtail happiness in respect of father, 
etc. A malefic in his own sign would however not cause detriment to the 
house he tenants but promotes its affairs. 
A.-10 
146 
HOW TO INTERPRET THE INFLUENCES IN SIGNS 
Certain effects of planets caused by their occupying particular 
signs have been described in the preceding paragraphs. These 
traits, trends and probabilities have been described in standard 
Sanskrit texts on the subject and as far as possible we have given 
here a faithful rendering of the original to provide an insight 
into the ancient dicta. 
Some of the crude descriptions, such as those described for 
Saturn in Aries, would probably not be liked by those who or 
whose friends or relations have Saturn in Aries. They may well 
point out a million persons, who have Saturn in Aries and yet 
who are scholars and rich, have friends and lead a comfortable life; 
nor do they lack in the milk of human kindness. There are pro- 
fessors, scholars, engineers, good lawyers, judges, efficient execu- 
tives, well-to-do businessmen who have Saturn in Aries. The 
critic might with- justification ask why if the description does 
not fit in with realities, has it been given in here. 
Saturn stays in Aries for two and a half years. And every 
thirtieth year, he comes back to Aries and is there for two and a 
half years. How can millions and millions of persons born 
during this two and a half years have the same traits or 
characteristics? The point raised is very relevant. The explanation 
is that there is a set of planetary influences working for each 
individual and that set can be analysed as follows: 
(i) The rising sign, (ii) the degree rising in the sign, (iii) planets 
in signs, (iv) the degree occupied by a planet in the sign, (v) the 
house position of the planet, (vi) the aspect on the rising sign, ( 
vii) the aspect of planets on planets, (viii) the pattern of dis- 
tribution of planets in the chart; the combination of planets 
interse, (ix) the strength of the planets and their dispositors. For 
example, Saturn in Aries will show twelve kinds of influences 
according as Mars, lord of Aries is in Aries, Taurus, Gemini or 
Cancer and so on. If Mars is exalted in Capricorn, Saturn in 
Aries, due to his occupying sign of Mars, will not show such evil 
results; but if Mars is debilitated in Cancer, Saturn in Aries 
would produce the worse effects and several other factors, which 
can not be gone in to in an elementary textbook, modify the 
effects. So, the sign position is only one factor out of many. 
And though detailed descriptions have been given in the ancient 
147 
texts of the aspects of. other planets modifying the influences 
due to occupation in a particular sign by a particular planet 
space does not permit going into them here and we shall content 
ourselves by stating that the aspect of benefics, Jupiter, Mercury, 
Venus or the Moon with Pakshabala on another planet tones 
down the evil influence and at times makes it positively good. 
The converse is also the case, when the benefic results described 
for a planet are pulled down if aspected by a malefic like Saturn, 
Mars or the Sun. The conjunction also acts in a similar manner. 
If Jupiter and Saturn are conjoined, then some of the good 
qualities of Jupiter are minimised, while the evil ones of Saturn 
are mitigated. 
Another principle should also never be lost sight of. The 
inherent vices of wickedness, meanness, dishonesty, treachery, 
quarrelsomeness, adulterous conduct, sinful acts, selfishness, lust 
and greed, are deep rooted at all levels of society. Foolishness 
and stupidity are also found in educated people. What is folly? 
The Oxford Dictionary describes it as being 'foolish, want of 
good sense, unwise conduct; foolish act, idea or practice.' And 
the word stupid, is defined as 'in a state of stupor or lethargy, 
dull by nature, slow witted, lacking in sensibility, obtuse....' 
So we find these qualities in all ranks of people, but the 
wickedness or dishonesty of a cooly who may pilfer a passenger's 
luggage will be different from the wickedness or dishonesty of a 
businessman, who gradually eats up the funds of a joint stock 
company and ultimately brings about its liquidation to the detri- 
ment of the share-holders, or the wickedness or dishonesty of 
the politician who resorts to all kinds of practices, fair and unfair, 
to keep himself in power. 
Hindu astrologers have stated time and again that in making 
predictions the setting or the background of an individual is an 
important factor. They say, "Take into consideration the 
country, he belongs to, the times and the individual." We shall 
explain this further, for this is the cardinal principle of astrological 
interpretation. Let us take the country first. How would the phy- 
sical characteristics, the complexion particularly, of a child born 
of Anglo-Saxon parents agree with those born of Negro parents? 
Next let us take the time factor. Conditions of living and social 
circumstances differ from time to time. One hundred years back, 
if a lady in India knew the three R's she was called educated. 
148 
Today girls in millions are receiving higher education. Then 
comes the third factor—the person whose nativity is under con- 
sideration. If the person is born in a rich and affluent family 
that purchases one or two new cars every year, acquisition of a 
vehicle would be no astrological prediction; while to a labourer 
or a clerk, even the purchase of a scooter would be a red letter 
day in his life. 
In writing this our purpose is to apply the principles of astro- 
logy with due consideration of all the factors. We have given in 
the next chapter the influences of planets in different houses. The 
influence due to (i) sign position and (ii) house position, should 
be blended and the result arrived at after noting the conjunctions 
or aspects they form with other planets. 
CHAPTER 
PLANETS IN HOUSES 
SUN IN THE TWELVE HOUSES 
Sun in First House. If the Sun is in the first house, the native 
is chivalrous; he is not easily moved from his resolve by others; 
suffers from eye-disease and is without mercy. If the Sun in 
the first house be in Aries, he is learned, wealthy and independent, 
but may suffer in respect of eye-sight; if it be in Leo, he is 
liable to suffer from night blindness; if it be in Libra, he will be 
in indigent circumstances, a son or sons may die prematurely; 
eye-sight is also likely to suffer; if it be in Cancer, some white 
film or speck will be formed in the eye. If the Sun be in Pisces, 
the native will be waited upon and served by ladies. 
The Sun here inclines to baldness; the native is of angry 
temperament, impatient and lazy but proud; he is not of a 
forgiving disposition. The native is not fat, may have some 
ailment in the head due to pitta (bile); spends on benefic objects; 
has average matrimonial happiness; gains from cattle. According 
to one view, the health is indifferent during boyhood. 
Sun in Second House. Very wealthy, but if the Sun is weak, 
liable to financial penalty or confiscation of property by the 
government; suffers from diseases of the mouth; devoid of 
learning, defective or of harsh speech but eloquent; fair chance 
of gain from copper, gold and metals; not a good position for 
happiness in respect of wife or children. 
150 
Sun in Third House. Endowed with valour and intelligence; 
the native will be wealthy but inimical towards his relations, 
particularly brothers and sisters, or one of them might prematurely 
die; illness of mother or inharmonious relations with her; travels 
much; has good servants; happy but his companions are rough 
or undesirable persons. 
Sun in Fourth House. If the Sun is weak, devoid of happiness, 
suffers from mental distress; has no property nor friends. He 
serves the government and spends away his paternal property; 
liable to suffer from heart disease; illness of mother; opposition 
from Bandhus (agnates and cognates). If the Sun is strong, 
respect from the government and acquisition of landed property 
and friends. 
Sun in Fifth House. Premature death or illness of a son; 
devoid of wealth; not very long lived. The native will be intelligent 
and learned and will travel over mountainous regions. He is 
courageous and vanquishes his enemies; gain of money; suffers 
from stomach diseases. According to one view, the native is 
cruel, hard-hearted, suffers during childhood, and suffers from 
stomach disorders during youth or middle age. 
Sun in Sixth House. Proud, strong, worried by enemies but 
vanquishes them; will rise high in life; will be wealthy; have 
good digestive power; strongly sexed; will occupy a position of 
authority; respected by government. The wife's health is not 
very good; performs good deeds; heavy expenditure due to 
government or friends. 
Sun in Seventh House. Suffers insult, injury, humiliation due 
to women; acts in a manner to arouse the opposition of the 
government; health suffers; remains worried; matrimonial 
happiness suffers; wife may not keep good health; not strongly 
sexed; visits abroad; business does not thrive well. 
Sun in Eighth House. Few sons; eye-sight suffers; loses wealth; 
not long lived; also suffers in respect of friends; inimical towards 
women; separation from one's own people; apprehension of 
diseases due to imperfect secretion of bile. Sun herein causes 
worry; ailments of private parts; heavy expenditure, but elevates 
the native in matters religious. The native is discontented., 
Sun in Ninth House. Has sons, wealth and happiness; not 
good for the longevity of father or may be inimical towards father 
or religious preceptor; religiously inclined; lacks harmonious 
151 
relations with wife; much travelling; intelligence; chivalry; comf 
ort of servants and conveyance. The native is long lived but 
health may be indifferent during childhood. 
Sun in Tenth House. Valorous, learned, will have sons, con- 
veyances; will be wealthy; will be very intelligent and ac- 
complishes projects taken in hand; cannot be subdued by rivals 
or opponents; the native's business expands; suffers in respect of 
happiness from mother; may live at a place other than his native 
place; inherits wealth and fame. 
Sun in Eleventh House. Very wealthy; will be long lived; 
has a good position; strong; has good servants; others are 
jealous of him; devoid of friends or if the Sun is strong may 
have one powerful friend; an evil influence in respect of the 
eldest child/son; gain from several sources; stomach troubles; 
gain from government service; enjoyment of wife. 
Sun in Twelfth House. Fallen, i.e., unsuccessful in work or 
fall in career. The native will be inimical towards his father; 
bereft of wealth and happiness in respect of children also 
suffers; has not a liberal outlook; devoid of strength; spends money 
on benefic objects; troubled by enemies but vanquishes them; 
impediments in work connected with government. Sun herein 
elevates in matters religious. The native travels much. 
MOON IN THE TWELVE HOUSES 
Moon in the First House. When at birth the Moon is in the 
first house in Aries, Taurus or Cancer, the native is very clever, 
wealthy and of good personality; but in other signs, it damages 
the sense of sight, hearing or speech or intelligence and the native 
follows a career of service. The ill effects described for Moon's 
location generally manifest themselves when the Moon is waning 
and is weak particularly when aspected by malefics. On the lathe' 
hand, if the Moon is waxing, i.e., the birth is in the bright half of 
the month with good Pakshabala, the native has a strong con- 
stitution and is long lived. According to one school, if the Moon 
is debilitated or in the house of a malefic, then only the evil 
effects take place, otherwise the native has a good body and is 
wealthy. The Moon being generally a benefic, the native is 
cheerful, fond of aesthetic pleasures, travels much or has a 
passion for walking, particularly if the Moon be in a moveable 
152 
or dual sign. The native has good conjugal happiness. 
Moon in Second House. Endowed with wealth; the native has 
a large family; is sensuous and of agreeable speech. If the Moon 
is full, the native is very wealthy and does not speak much. 
The Moon herein gives more sisters than brothers; the native 
enjoys good food. A strong moon will give a beautiful face to the 
native and good name and fame. The native is clever in under- 
standing the ideas of others and toad of learning. A weak Moon 
in second, fully aspected by Mercury, makes the native spend 
away his wealth. The Moon in the dark fortnight and with little 
Pakshabala is deemed a malefic and retards accumulation of 
wealth and particularly so if aspected by a malefic. Also, the 
Moon herein causes apprehension from water. 
Moon in Third House. The native is strong, powerful and 
courageous; has brothers and patronises them; is of lascivious 
inclinations. He is learned but miserly. He has a cheerful tempera- 
ment; engages in business; is fond of travelling. This is a good 
position for having conveyances. If the Moon is in a malefic's 
sign, it is adverse for happiness in respect of brothers and 
sisters; the native does not speak much and is of an aggressive 
temperament. 
Moon in Fourth House. Endowed with happiness, landed 
property, friends, etc.; prospers well in respect of matters per- 
taining to the fourth house; amorous; enjoys life. The native is 
also generous in giving to others. He is fond of travelling by 
water or likes to live near the sea, rivers or lakes. He obliges 
his friends; is intelligent and of a cool temper. 
Moon in Fifth House. Endowed with intelligence, sons and 
daughters and happiness in respect of the affairs of the fifth 
house; rises to a high position in life. He has good friends and 
is of a forgiving temperament. The native walks gently. The 
Moon in the fifth gives good fecundity but if the Moon is weak 
(in Pakshabala) and in a Papa's sign, trouble on account of 
children is to be expected. The native is inclined towards occult 
and religious practices. A very weak Moon unaspected by male 
planets may give him only daughters. 
Moon in Sixth House. The native has a large number of 
enemies; digestive powers are sluggish or he may suffer from 
stomach trouble; sexual urge also below par; he is indolent but 
aggressive. If the Moon is weak (in Pakshabala)he will suffer 
153 
humiliation at the hands of others. This is also an adverse factor 
for good longevity. But a full Moon bestows long life. The Moon 
in the sixth gives unhappiness during childhood, impairs eye- 
sight and inflicts trouble from enemies. The native has good 
servants and cattle. But if there be full Moon or he be in his own 
sign or exalted, the native is generous and leads a luxurious life. 
Moon in Seventh House. The native is jealous; is attached to 
women; is very intelligent; strongly sexed and of comely 
appearance. He has a wife with a good personality. He is fond of 
travelling and is of soft speech. He engages steadfastly in busi- 
ness. If .the birth be during the dark half of the month and the 
Moon is weak (in Pakshabala) the native has health troubles 
and is humble. If the Moon be weak and aspected by malefics, 
even his wife would be sickly. The Moon in the seventh in a 
male nativity makes him subservient to his wife's wishes. 
Moon in Eighth House. Very intelligent and valorous; suffers 
from Vyadhis (physical ailments); not long lived. If the birth be 
during day time and during the dark half of the month, i.e., 
when the Moon is waning, such a Moon is not detrimental to 
longevity, rather it protects the child. Similarly, if the birth be 
during night and during the bright half of the month, it is not 
unfavourable for longevity—the native will have a good span of 
life. 
The Moon in the eighth makes the native jealous, fickle minded 
and keeps the mind worried. He is generous, but does not have 
a large family, unless the second house is very strong. If the 
Moon be in Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Virgo, Libra, Sagittarius or 
Pisces or there be a full Moon, the native suffers from respiratory 
troubles, asthma, etc. The Moon herein gives love for learning. 
Again, a strong Moon herein, as in the second house, makes one 
rich and bestow overlordship. 
Moon in Ninth House. Endowed with wealth, prosperity, sons, 
friends and Bandhus* (relations). He is very popular with ladies. 
The native is religiously inclined. He is very active, fond of 
foreign places, is intelligent, a lover of learning, of good temper, 
pays homage to elderly people, and is,courageous. He does not 
have many brothers. If the Moon be a weak one, then the 
native is not very intelligent nor rich. 
Moon in Tenth House. Highly religious; valorous; endowed 
* Bandhus include relations through father as well as through mother. 
154 
with wealth; successful in 1"," undertakings; performs good deeds 
and obliges others. He will triumph over others. He is generous 
in giving. The native is optimistic and pushes on ahead success- 
fully. He has maternal happiness, has friends, is long-lived, indus- 
trious and leads a comfortable and luxurious life. He may be 
connected with governmental work. This position is good for 
name and/ame. 
Moon in Eleventh House. Famous, prospers well in respect of 
eleventh house affairs. He will apply his mind closely and per- 
severingly to work in hand; will have wealth, sons and daughters, 
servants, and will be long-lived. He is clever in governmental 
work. He is very fond of his sons and has a great yearning for 
foreign lands. But if the Moon be weak, debilitated or in the sign 
of a Papa, he does not enjoy the good effects described above; 
will not be intelligent; also suffers from matters of health. 
Moon in Twelfth House. Does not have a liberal outlook; 
suffers from infirmity of some limb or in respect of eye-sight; 
has an undignified position in life. People will be jealous of him. 
He will be indolent and will suffer misery and humiliation. The 
native will be much worried, will spend much; speak softly; will 
be proud and of good appearance. According to one school, the 
Moon in Gemini, Cancer, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces, shows 
good effects; the native is merciful and has control over his 
senses, but his company consists of low class Persons. The Moon 
herein generally takes one abroad or the person lives in a region 
other than his native place. 
Thus it will be seen that in delineating the influence of the 
Moon in the twelve houses, great emphasis has been laid on the 
strength of the Moon. A planet has twenty-four kinds of strength, 
but here cognisance has primarily been taken of two kinds : (i) 
position in sign, and (ii) the Pakshabala. A waning moon is 
considered weak. A waxing Moon is considered strong. The 
greater the number of bright digits, the stronger the Moon. Thus 
when there is conjunction of the Sun and Moon, the Moon has 
no Pakshabala and as it proceeds away from the Sun, the number 
of bright digits commence to increase, so that on a full Moon 
day, the Moon has the greatest strength. A full Moon is good, 
but this position of the Moon is likely to affect adversely the 
eye-sight if the Moon is in second, sixth, eighth or the twelfth 
house. Barring this aspect, the full Moon being a strong benefit 
155 
enhances the good effects of the house he tenants. 
MARS IN THE TWELVE HOUSES 
Marr in First Flouse. Gets hurt in the body, generally the 
head or the part of the body representing the sign on the ascen- 
dant; or instead of the hurt, there might be a boil or operation. 
The native is hard-hearted and unless Mars be in his own 
sign, or exalted, a malefic in the first house is instrumental in 
affecting longevity adversely. The native is very courageous and 
active. Trouble to the mother; the early part of the life - the 
childhood years — is not happy; diseases of stomach and teeth 
likely; impaired matrimonial happiness also and unless Mars is 
strong, it is an adverse factor for accumulation of wealth. Mars 
in the first house gives a youthful appearance, i.e., even in old 
age the native appears younger than his actual age. 
Mars in Second House. The native commits sinful acts; not 
eloquent in speech or speaks harshly. This location of Mars is 
an impediment to learning and wealth; but not so if Mars is in 
Aries, Scorpio or Capricorn. The native has to be dependant on 
undesirable people; trouble in eye or ear; loss by theft; dis- 
harmony in family. This is a good location for business in metals 
or manufacturing where fire is used. The native generally settles 
down at a place other than his homeland. If Mars be weak or 
afflicted by aspect of Papas, loss of wealth may be expected. 
Marr in Third House. Intelligent, wealthy and happy; has 
much resistance and fighting stamina, but an adverse factor for 
longevity of a younger brother or relations with brothers may not 
be cordial; also an adverse factor for happiness in respect of 
mother. If Mars is exalted, the native leads a luxurious life, but 
Mars in debilitation or in an enemy's sign or in that of a Papa 
curtails wealth and happiness. Mars in third, if aspected by 
Saturn, is likely to cause a fracture of the arm, thigh or hip. 
But if benefics tenant or aspect the third house, this disaster may 
be averted. 
Mars in Fourth House. Unless Mars is in his own sign, the 
native will have much distress of mind; will be bereft of friends, 
happiness from mother, landed property and conveyances. The 
fourth is the house of comforts and happiness. An ill-placed Mars 
curtails these. But if Mars is strong and aspected by benefics, 
156 
gain of landed property is likely. It is an adverse factor for 
matrimonial happiness for Mars herein will aspect the seventh 
house; also affects adversely the house of children, the fourth 
house being twelfth from fifth; the native lives at a place other 
than his homeland. He is sensuous and inclined to have liaisons 
with women. Mars in the fourth, if aspected by malefics, will 
cause disease in the region of the chest or in the part of the body 
governed by the sign on the cusp of the fourth house. 
Mars in Fifth House. Unless in his own sign or Mars be the 
lord of the first house, happiness in respect of children is 
curtailed; causes sickness to children or premature death of a 
child. It is an impediment to accumulation of money. The native 
will be a back-biter and suffer reverses in career. This location 
has an unfavourable impact on intelligence also. There is trouble 
from enemies; loss of cattle; the native eats much and there is 
likelihood of stomach troubles. Disease also likely in private 
parts. 
Mars in Sixth House. The native is strong and vanquishes 
his enemies; but if Mars be weak, the native is much troubled 
by his enemies. He is oversexed. He has a good digestive power. 
He is wealthy and famous. But there is likelihood of boils and 
wounds and disease due to impurity of blood. Causes trouble to 
maternal uncle (mother's brothers and sisters — the sixth being 
third from fourth). The native is religious and his powers and 
prestige increase. But there is heavy expenditure of money; this 
location also causes an impediment in the conception of children. 
An exalted Mars would bestow very good results, but an afflicted 
one will produce constant pinpricks from enemies. Mars in 
Aries or Scorpio make one generally follow a service career. 
Mars in Seventh House. A very disturbing factor for matri- 
monial happiness, but if Mars be in his own sign or lord of the 
first, not so evil. The native suffers, humiliation on account of 
women; also liable to contract diseases from women. The native 
travels much. His actions are not commendable. This location 
is also not good for wealth or the native's own health. His 
temper is fiery. This position also curtails happiness in respect 
of father. Mars* herein generally gives an aggressive and comba- 
tive wife. 
Mars in Eighth House. Few sons; eye-sight suffers; liability 
to have piles or fistula, as also diseases arising out of impurity 
157 
of blood. Generally gets indebted and runs overdraft account. 
This location of Mars curtails longevity. It also brings infamy, and 
also causes mental distress. Happiness in respect of brother is 
impaired; brings fear from thieves and enemies; the native is 
constantly worried on account of financial matters. 
Mars in Ninth House. Endowed with sons, wealth and happi- 
ness, but curtailed happiness in respect of father; the native 
performs cruel acts; has powerful supporters. The ninth being the 
house of piety and religion, a malefic therein, unless exalted or 
in own sign, drags down the nativity in respect of good 
actions. From the ninth, Mars fully aspects the third, and unless 
the sign on the third is Mars' own, either there is premature 
death of a brother or relations with brothers are not harmonious. 
If Mars and Moon are both together in the ninth, this is not good 
for longevity of mother. 
Mars in Tenth House. Learned and famous; a leader of men; 
occupies good position in life; not good for father's longevity 
or relations with him may not be very cordial; generally gains 
from fire, copper, factories, or red things and commodities falling 
in the group of Mars; enters military or police service; generous 
and praised by eminent persons; very active and dashing; 
triumphs over enemies; trouble from brothers. Mars in the 
tenth house, opposed by Sun from fourth, may cause heart disease 
to the father of the native. 
Mars in Eleventh House. Very wealthy, courageous and happy. 
The native will be of good temper, but the adverse aspect on the 
fifth house will spoil the prospects of that house. The native will 
be religious but of an angry temper. If Mars is exalted, the native 
will be very wealthy and pushing, and there will be much inflow of 
money. But this location curtails matrimonial happiness and 
simultaneously with good income, there is heavy expenditure 
also. 
Marr in Twelfth House. Falls from grace; eye-sight, especially 
the left eye, suffers; ear trouble; premature decay of teeth and 
dental diseases; gets indebted and generally runs an overdraft 
account; if very much afflicted, liable to be accused in a criminal 
case or suffers confinement. The native is evil-minded. This loca- 
tion also affects matrimonial happiness adversely. Mars in twelfth 
if conjoined with a female planet may cause loss of money due to 
dancing girls, etc. 
158 
MERCURY IN THE TWELVE HOUSES 
Mercury in First Houre. The native is learned, intelligent, clever 
in speech and of sweet tongue. He will be well versed in general 
knowledge of lands and people and well up in poetry and 
mathematics. Mercury in the first house endowes the native with 
a good body, much physical activity and a long life. The native 
is fond of friends and supports his relations. He is also attached 
to his wife. He is economical and prudent. He may live and 
prosper at a place other than his native land. 
Mercury in Second House. The native is wealthy, and earns 
money by dint of his intelligence. He is truthful and his speech 
is sweet, clear and unambiguous. He is diplomatic. Unless 
Mercury is conjoined with or aspected by Saturn, Rahu or Ketu, 
the native is devoted to his father. His actions are good. He 
partakes of dainty dishes, i.e., gets sumptuous food. As the second 
house pertains to family, Mercury which is a natural benefic 
herein, gives a large family. 
Mercury in Third House. The native is brave and powerful. 
He lives up to the age of 72. He will have good brothers and 
sisters. If the lord of the third and Mars are strong and well placed 
and if the third house is beneficially aspected, the number of 
brothers and sisters will be large. But if the reverse be the case, 
the number of brothers and sisters will be limited. The native 
will suffer fatigue due to hard work and he may also have to 
suffer humiliation. He is clever in keeping his thoughts concealed 
from others. He is always on the move, and particularly so if in a 
moveable sign. The native is religious and does good deeds. He 
has a knack for trade and commerce and is respected by his 
relations. 
Mercury in the Fourth House. The native is learned. He will 
win the favour of others with his pleasing speech. He has friends, 
conveyances, lands, money and granaries. He has a number of 
people around him and has good Bandhus (strictly speaking 
Bandhus' mean persons by cognate relationship. But here the 
term may be taken to I include agnates as well as cognates). The 
native is devoted to his mother. 
Mercury is a natural benefic and he provides abundance of 
material comforts and happiness from relations as judged from 
the fourth house. The rule that a Karaka if tenanting the house 
159 
for which he is a karaka, spoils the house tenanted does not 
appear to apply to Mercury. 
Mercury is a volatile planet and attracts in greater measure 
the qualities of the sign he is in and of the planets he is associated 
with; so if he is in a malefic's sign in the fourth, the number of 
relations will be curtailed, and the native will make money by 
dubious and underhand means; if Mercury be exalted, good 
conjugal happiness may be expected. Mercury weak and aspected 
by malefics, keeps the native sickly in boyhood. 
Mercury in Fifth Flouse. The native will be a good counsellor 
or secretary, and if the nativity is strong, he may occupy the 
elevated position of an ambassador or adviser or minister. He 
has a thirst for knowledge and love for poetry and may be 
humorous also if Moon and Mercury conjoin. He will command 
respect due to his power of delicate discrimination and will be 
initiated into the incantation of Mantras (divine spells). The native 
will be religiously inclined and devoted to gods and Brahmans. 
The native will have a large progeny. He will be optimistic and 
happy. This is a good position for conjugal happiness also. 
Mercury in Sixth Flouse. The native will have no enemies, 
but there will be many occasions to cause ire on account of dis- 
putes. The native will use sharp speech, i.e., he will be harsh 
and incisive in speaking. He will, however, be a little lazy. But 
Saravali, a standard work in Sanskrit, advances an apparently 
contrary view in regard to disputes and enmities. According to 
Kalyanvarma, the author of Saravali, the native will be much 
oppressed by his enemies and will also suffer from physical ail- 
ments, which would be a source of constant trouble. The fact is 
that there is no contradiction. If Mercury is strong, in a benefic's 
sign and aspected by benefics, good results will follow; but if the 
planet is ,in a malefic's sign and aspected by malefics, .evil 
influence described above will be felt. An afflicted Mercury in the 
sixth gives an unhappy boyhood. Mercury herein makes the 
native industrious and fond of his wife. 
Mercury in Seventh Houre. The native will be intelligent, 
learned and well up in the amorous arts. He will wear fine clothes, 
will attain grandeur and marry a rich lady. The native's wife 
will be intelligent and comely in appearance, but if Mercury be 
weak or in a malefic's sign, she may not come from a high 
family and may have a long tongue. The native himself attains 
160 
good status in life and is long-lived. He has a knack for trade and 
commerce, but unless the planet is strong and well aspected. 
being a male eunuch, he curtails the potency and virility in a 
male nativity. 
Mercury in Eighth House. The native will attain a high 
position in life and will be well renowned and long-lived. ,file 
will be the head of a large family and will occupy a position 
where he can inflict penalty on others. He is industrious, wealthy 
and religiously inclined. But if the planet is in a malefic's sign 
and aspected by malefics, the native's actions will not be good 
and he will earn infamy thereby. An afflicted Mercury herein 
also gives a troublesome period in boyhood. 
Mercury in Ninth House. The native is happy, endowed with 
wealth and sons. He will be learned, very clever, eloquent in 
speech and religious. He engages in trade and commerce or is an 
author of books or in diplomatic service. Mercury is primarily 
the planet governing intelligence, expression, diplomacy and tact 
and the native will be successful in all kinds of work where he 
is an intermediary between two parties. But if Mercury is 
associated with malefics, the native will no doubt be industrious 
but his actions will not be commendable. 
Mercury in Tenth House. The native is valorous, intelligent 
and well informed. He will be learned and stick to the path of 
truth. He will be devoted to his parents and earn respect of the 
people and the government. His actions will be above blemish. 
He will have much physical and mental stamina and will engage 
himself in large undertakings, in which he will be successful. 
The native will be wealthy, possesses property and household goods. 
Mercury in Eleventh House. The native is very wealthy, 
famous and longlived. He will be truthful and have a number of 
obedient servants. He will be fond of female company and will be 
endowed with various worldly comforts. This is a good position 
for happiness in respect of children. The native triumphs over 
his enemies. 
Mercury in Twelfth House. The native will fall from a high 
position or his enterprises end in frustration. He is listless, devoid 
of learning, hard-hearted and indolent and will suffer humiliation. 
He will be intent upon following advice offered by others, but 
success will not be achieved. The above ill effects are felt if 
Mercury is weak and afflicted by malefics, but if the planet be 
161 
strong and well aspected, the native has a pleasing personality, 
is religiously inclined, speaks sweetly and spends on good deeds. 
JUPITER IN THE TWELVE HOUSES 
Jupiter in First Houre. If Jupiter is in the first house, the native 
is learned, long-lived and has a pleasing personality. He will 
have a good body and abundant life force. He will be free from 
fear. His execution of work is after mature deliberation, i.e., after 
considering all the pros and cons. He will be wise, persevering 
and of good conduct. He will command wealth and respect and 
will have sons. 
Jupiter in Second House. If Jupiter is in the second house, the 
native will be learned and eloquent in speech. He gets sumptuous 
food and has an adorable face. The native is inclined to sacrifice 
his money for the good of others. The first part of his life is 
not happy or prosperous. If Jupiter herein be in Sagittarius or 
Pisces, the native is wealthy and overcomes his enemies, he 
engages in trade and commerce; but Jupiter in second in any 
other sign keeps the finances at a low ebb and disturbs family 
happiness also. 
Jupiter in Third House. If Jupiter is in the third, the native is 
miserly. He however spends on a good cause, is religious and 
learned, fond of his wife or women, is inclined to travel and 
may be an author. The native will have confidence in his brothers 
or his brothers will have confidence in him. He will be maliciously 
inclined; his actions will not be commendable and he will not 
command much respect. Jupiter herein brings occasions when 
the native is put to humiliation. His digestive power is not good. 
He will have an overbearing wife. He will feel the pinch of 
money at critical times. 
Jupiter in Fourth Houre. If Jupiter is in the fourth, the native 
leads a comfortable life. He will have happiness in respect of 
mother, friends, servants, wife and agricultural produce. He will 
be eminent, but will have distress due to enemies. He is long- 
lived and earns respect, spends on a good cause, but unless the 
fifth house and the lord thereof are strong and well aspected. 
this location of Jupiter may cause an impediment or delay in 
the birth of sons. 
Jupiter in Fifth House. If Jupiter is in the fifth, the native 
A.-11 
162 
is intelligent and may occupy a high position in life. He will have 
wealth and will be happy and have friends. The PhalaDeepika, 
a standard work in Sanskrit, states that the native will suffer on 
account of, or want of, sons, but according to Kalyan Varma, 
an ancient writer, the native will have sons and happiness thereby. 
The two views have to be reconciled thus. Jupiter unconjoined 
with any benefic or aspected by malefics shows unfavourable 
trends in regard to sons. But if Jupiter is strong and beneficially 
conjoined or aspected, good results in respect of children are to 
be predicted. Generally speaking, Jupiter by himself in the fifth 
house, causes unhappiness in regard to sons and gives stomach 
troubles also. 
Jupiter in Sixth House. If Jupiter is in the sixth, the native is 
free,from enemies or overpowers his enemies, but he will be 
indolent and suffer disrespect also. He is well up in the use of 
charms and divine spells. He is weak and lacks in vitality and 
potency; the digestive power is low. The native, however, becomes 
famous; he earns a name and fame through his wife also (the 
natives' wife may be an important person). But if Jupiter is 
retrograde, however high a position the native might have, he will 
suffer distress on account of his enemies. 
Jupiter in Seventh House. If Jupiter is in the seventh, the 
native rises to a position higher than that of his father. He will 
have a good wife, good speech and a pleasing personality. He 
will be rich and more generous than his father. The native is wise 
and holds an important position. He may be a poet. He is very 
famous but is lustful and inclined to have liaisons. 
Jupiter in Eighth House. If Jupiter is in eighth, the natives' 
actions are not commendable. He will be humble and earn his 
livelihood by service; he runs errands for others. The native 
visits holy places and is fond of the mystic and occult traditions. 
He has a slovenly wife (look for other indications also). He is 
dissatisfied with his wife and with his financial circumstances, 
but is long-lived. The native is put to financial loss by his friends 
and is worried. He may also suffer from some undiagnosed or 
concealed disease. 
Jupiter in Ninth House. If Jupiter is in the ninth, the native is 
given to performing religious austerities. He becomes famous and 
may occupy a high position in life and if the nativity is strong, 
he may become a minister or a leader. He worships gods and 
163 
Brahmans and is endowed with learning, sons and wealth, but is 
miserly. 
Jupiter in Tenth House. If Jupiter is in the tenth, the native 
is very rich. He receives favours from the government. He follows 
the path of righteous conduct and is devoted to his parents. The 
native is clever and prosperous and is successful in all his under- 
takings. This is a very good location of the planet for happiness, 
wealth, attendants, conveyances, name and fame. The native 
leads a chaste life. 
Jupiter in Eleventh House. If Jupiter is in the eleventh, the 
native has a large income. He is wealthy and long-lived. He will 
have servants and conveyances, but a limited number of children. 
His education will also not be very high. He will be bold and 
fearless. Generally Jupiter alone in the eleventh house obstructs 
the inflow of wealth, but when conjoined with another planet he 
brings in much money. 
Jupiter in Twelfth House. If Jupiter is in the twelfth, the native 
is devoid of attachment. People will harbour enmity towards him. 
He is not eloquent in speech, nor will there be happiness on 
account of sons. He will be sinful in conduct, indolent and 
engage in the service of others. He travels a lot. If Jupiter is in 
the sign of a malefic, the native makes a hypocritical show of 
religious fervour. Jupiter in Sagittarius or Pisces in the twelfth 
does not show the evil traits described for his location in the 
twelfth house; the native is religious and inclined to charity 
and benevolence and accumulates money. 
VENUS IN THE TWELVE HOUSES 
Venus in Firrt House. When Venus is in the first house, the 
native leads a comfortable life and is long-lived. He has a pleasing 
personality, but is not courageous. He is well up in the amorous 
arts. The native speaks well and is generally liked. This is a good 
position for female company. 
Venus in Second House. If Venus is in second, the native's 
speech is sweet. He is learned and if other indications confirm 
he may be a poet. He gets sumptuous food throughout his life. 
The native is courageous and fortunate. He has a good family. 
The native may gain from metals (silver and lead) and other 
people's wealth. Venus herein makes one wealthy. 
164 
Venus in Third House. If Venus is in third, the native is 
miserly and is not liked much. He lacks enthusiasm. He is fond 
of travelling and is fortunate; he has good servants. The native 
is devoted to his mother; lives at a place other than his home- 
land. His eye-sight may suffer. If Venus is strong and well 
aspected, the native will be wealthy and have conjugal happiness; 
but if Venus be weak and aspected by malefics, he will be 
devoid of wealth and conjugal happiness, but the native's wife 
will have considerable influence over him. 
Venus in Fourth House. If Venus is in the fourth, the native 
leads a comfortable life; has a good house, conveyances, good 
clothes and ornaments. He has an amiable personality and an 
enthusiastic frame of mind. He has good friends and relations. 
He is devoted to his father and eldery people. The native is 
wealthy and generally fortunate. 
Venus in Fifth House. If Venus is in the fifth, the native is 
wealthy. He is amorous and leads a comfortable life. He has 
sons and good friends. He is learned and very intelligent and 
speaks well. He may engage in trade and commerce. He 
annihilates his enemies. If Venus is strong, he may occupy a good 
position as a secretary, counsellor, minister, magistrate or a 
judge. This location of the planet indicates more daughters than 
sons and the native is attached to his sons-in-law. 
Venus in Sixth House. If Venus is in the sixth, the native 
resorts to low acts, but is without wealth. He spends economically 
and to good purpose. The native suffers from secret ailments or 
ulcers. He will be corrupted by young women and will have no 
peace of mind. Venus herein gives rise to enmities with women. 
If Venus is exalted or strong, the native will have no enemies 
or will overpower them, but if the planet is weak, the native 
will have a number of enemies. 
Venur in Seventh Houre. If Venus is in the seventh, the native 
has a good personality and is over-sexed. He will have a good 
and beautiful wife, but will have liaisons with other women of 
loose morals and if other indications confirm, he may lose his 
wife prematurely, particularly if Venus herein be in Scorpio. This 
is on the principle that the location of the Karaka in the house for 
which he is a Karaka, is not good. 
Venus herein makes the native wealthy. He would be of an 
amiable disposition and will avoid frictions, but if Venus be 
165 
afflicted by malefics he will be quarrelsome. The native will 
generally be fortunate and have sons, but he will suffer from 
diseases of the urinary tract. 
Venus in Eighth House. If Venus is in the eighth, the native 
resorts to low acts. He is persevering and fond of travelling and 
is religious. This is a good location for longevity, the owning of 
immovable property and for service with the government. The 
native is prosperous and leads a comfortable life. In a male 
nativity, a weak Venus may cause diseases of the urinary tract 
or spermatorrhea. 
Venus in Ninth House. If Venus is in the ninth, the native is 
religious, worships gods and manes and is hospitable to guests 
and Brahmans. He is learned and sticks to truth; he will 
have happiness in respect of wife, sons and friends. He will be 
wealthy and lead a comfortable life. The native is optimistic and 
rises in life by dint of his own efforts. He commands respect and 
receives favours from the government. 
Venus in Tenth House. If Venus is in the tenth, the native is 
wealthy and possesses - property. He will earn name and fame. 
He will have friends and a regular income for a comfortable life. 
He will be very intelligent. In any contest or competition with 
others, he will come out with flying colours and each of these 
occasions will add to his rise in life. 
Venus in Eleventh House. If Venus is in the eleventh, there is 
good gain of money, pleasures of the bed and the requisites of 
comfort. The native has good servants and leads a comfortable 
life. 
Venus in Twelfth House. If Venus is in the twelfth, the native 
is wealthy, economical and saves money. Health during child- 
hood may suffer. The native is well up in the amorous arts, but 
indolent and leads life in a happy-go-lucky fashion. He, however, 
triumphs over his enemies. The native's wife has considerable 
influence over him. The planet's location herein is good for 
pleasures but not so for a career. 
Note: Venus in Pisces, in any house, will make one wealthy, 
SATURN IN THE TWELVE HOUSES 
Saturn in Firrt House.Thz native leads a life of poverty; he 
is indolent, melancholy, sickly, unclean, and resorts to low acts. 
166 
He has dissatisfied lust; speaks slowly; suffers in health during 
childhood. If the planet herein is in an enemy's sign, the native 
quarrels with his friends. But if Saturn be in Libra, Sagittarius or 
Pisces, the native is good-looking and learned; he is the head of 
an institution and equal to a king. Saturn in Capricorn or 
Aquarius shows the same effects as in Libra, Sagittarius or Pisces, 
but in lesser measure. According to one school, the planet here 
in Taurus is also good. 
Saturn in Second Houre. The native suffers from facial disease 
or a disease of the mouth. He has plenty of money, but suffers 
financial penalty at the hands of the government. According to 
the PhalaDeepika, the native would be poor, but at a later age 
he would live at a place other than his native home and will 
have wealth, vehicles and pleasures. The native is devoted to his 
mother, but it is in an adverse location for happiness in respect 
of brothers. 
Saturn in Third House. The native will be intelligent, wise 
and valorous; he will be indolent and have no peace of mind; 
he spends much and will be inclined to give in charity, though 
generally speaking, his actions will not be commendable. He 
will have happiness from his wife, but suffer in respect of child- 
ren. Saturn herein also causes damage to younger brothers and 
sisters. He generally lives at a place other than his homeland. 
Saturn in Fourth House. The native is devoid of happiness; 
has no peace of mind; is constantly worried; ill health during 
childhood; separation from mother; suffers in respect of happiness 
pertaining to father; bereft of property and conveyance; liable to 
heart disease, and also to suffer from ailments of the stomach. 
If Saturn is retrograde, there is distress due to wife, children and 
servants, also distress at places other than the homeland. But 
if Saturn is strong, the native is prosperous and has conveyances 
also. 
Saturn in Fifth House. The native may suffer for want of sons 
or there might be premature death of a child or trouble connected 
with children. He is also devoid of wealth, happiness and know- 
ledge and oppressed by enemies. The native has an evil bent of 
mind; his way of thinking is not straightforward. Liability to 
mental diseases, as also ailments of the stomach. The native has 
an appearance of humility; he leads an humble role in life. But if 
the planet be exalted or in his own sign, the evil effects are 
167 
minimised and the good ones felt. 
Saturn in Sixth House. If the planet is., strong, the native 
triumphs over his enemies, but if he be weak, the native himself 
suffers at the hands of his enemies. The planet afflicted or in an 
enemy's sign or in debilitation brings about annihilation of the 
native's own family The native is impudent, proud, and wealthy. 
He is over-sexed; has good digestive powers. But this is an evil 
location for happiness pertaining to mother, to whom he is the 
source of distress. Liability to suffer from ulcers and wounds and 
diseases arising out of imbalance of 'wind'. He is strong, but 
does not follow a righteous conduct. 
Saturn in Seventh House. The native's teeth are prominent. 
He is indolent and restless. He is put to distress and humiliation 
on account of women. He is without wealth and travels much; is 
attached to an unworthy or unseemly woman. The native resorts 
to low acts. Probability of a sickly wife or her premature death. 
Saturn in Eighth House. The number of children is limited. 
Eye-sight suffers; he also suffers from diseases of the stomach; 
liability to some undiagnosed disease or diseases of the private 
parts or piles. The native has good digestive powers. He is not 
wealthy; is disrespected by people. He serves others; lacks in the 
ability to take the initiative in new projects. The native will not 
be happy during the early years of life. Death due to ailments 
connected with Vata (wind) or at the hands of a ruffian. Kalyan 
Varma says that the native will not be long-lived, but other 
standard texts state that Saturn herein bestows long life. We agree 
with the latter view. 
Saturn in Ninth House. If the planet is strong, the native is 
rich and happy; happiness also from sons. The planet gives the 
native a philosophical turn of mind; he is fond of occult studies. 
But if the planet be weak, he is bereft of good fortune, wealth 
and father or no happiness in respect of them. The native will 
then have a malicious bent of mind and will cause distress to 
others. The native suffers in respect of brothers. He is courageous 
but oppressed by enemies; lives at a place other than his homeland. 
Saturn in Tenth House. There is gain from agriculture or 
products derived from the bowels of the earth, such as, minerals, 
oils, etc. The native has much knowledge of the Shastras ( 
scriptures), i.e., he is learned; brave and famous. He is wealthy 
and occupies a high position in life. He is the head of an institu- 
168 
tion or at the helm of affairs in his sphere of activity. This is 
an unfavourable location in respect of happiness pertaining to 
mother, but not evil in respect of father, unless Saturn is lord 
of the eighth house. The native generally lives at a place other than 
his home-land. 
Saturn in Eleventh Houre. The native has plenty of wealth, and 
is possessed of property; good income. 'He is courageous, has good 
health, but suffers ill health during childhood. He is strong, indu- 
strious and engages in trade or commerce. He may earn from 
artisanship or from products in Saturn's portfolio. But Saturn in 
this house is an adverse factor' for happiness in respect of 
brothers, sons or wife. The native may have more daughters and 
a few sons or no son. 
Saturn in Twelfth House. The native is "fallen'; i.e., suffers in 
public estimation due to low conduct or demoted in career or 
meets frustration in business enterprises. There is heavy expendi- 
ture. Eye-sight suffers; premature decay of teeth; not good for 
maternal uncle. The native is impudent and indigent; suffers from 
infirmity of a limb, is devoid of intelligence and is- oppressed by 
enemies. 
RAHU IN THE TWELVE HOUSES 
Rahu and Ketu have no physical bodies. They are merely 
sensitive points. They, therefore, imbibe the qualities of the 
planets they are conjoined with. If any of the nodes tenants a trine 
(the fifth or the ninth house) and is conjoined with the lord of 
an angle, it bestows excellent results. Similarly, if a node tenants 
an angle (the first, fourth, seventh or tenth house) and is conjoin- 
ed with the lord of a trine, it is considered a very good combina- 
tion. 
So let us not forget that Rahu or Ketu if conjoined with any 
planet in any house, will imbibe the qualities of the planet con- 
joined with it. If the house tenanted is good and the planet also 
good (inherently, as well as by ownership), the results will be 
excellent. But if the house tenanted is evil and the planet conjoin- 
ing also evil, unfavourable results will follow. 
Another important feature about Rahu and Ketu is that if they 
are not conjoined with any planet, or even if they are conjoined 
with any planet, they take up the qualities and attributes of the 
169 
house they tenant. 
According to one school, they also reflect the quality of their 
dispositor. For example, a node in Cancer will reflect in some 
measure the effect of the Moon; the node in Leo will show some 
attributes of the Sun; in Virgo, he will behave in a manner similar 
to Mercury, and so on, according to the lordship of the sign he 
is in. 
Hindu astrologers regard Rahu as having the qualities of Saturn 
and Ketu those of Mars. The third, sixth and the eleventh houses 
are considered the best for them to occupy; but when Rahu is in 
the third, Ketu will be in ninth; when Rahu is in sixth, Ketu will 
be in the twelfth — not a happy position; and when Rahu will be 
in eleventh, the corresponding position of the other node will be 
in the fifth — an evil location for affairs of the fifth house. 
We shall, however, briefly give below the effects of Rahu and 
Ketu in the twelve houses. 
Rahu in First House. Rahu in the first house endows one with 
the qualities of a serpent. He is cruel, devoid of mercy, inclined 
to be irreligious, maliciously inclined and over-sexed. He practices 
deception on his own people and resorts to low acts. The native 
is sickly, suffers from diseases of the head or in the upper part 
of the body. But he is strong and wealthy, triumphs in disputes 
with others. This is, however, not a good location for promoting 
conjugal happiness. The number of the native's sons is limited. 
He generally shines by reflected light, i.e., in the glory of others 
or by deriving authority from others and enjoys wealth also in a 
similar manner. He is amorous and fond of the company of women; 
engages in strife with others. If other indications confirm, likeli- 
hood of two marriages. 
Rahu in Aries, Taurus or Cancer in the ascendant, protects 
the native from all kinds of troubles of health or enemies. Rahu 
herein in Leo makes the native wealthy. He enjoys many luxuries. 
Rahu in Second House. The native is talkative but not truthful 
in speech; his speech may be dubious, insincere, misleading or 
factually incorrect. The native suffers from diseases of the mouth. 
He is malicious and of an angry temperament and does not accept 
the good advice of well wishers; opposes others. The native 
oppresses his brothers and is also oppressed by them. He tries to 
save money but is not rich. Although of a fearless frame of mind, 
he apprehends danger or assaults from enemies. He has to work 
170 
in a subordinate position and may suffer at the hands of the 
government on account of intrigues against him by low people. 
The early period of life is not happy. Gains from government 
sources, are likely. 
Rahu in Third House. The native has fixity of purpose; is 
proud and courageous like a lion. He is strong, has sisters; few 
brothers or the relations with his brothers are not harmonious. 
The native is very intelligent, optimistic and valorous and engages 
in profitable work or business. He is friendly with people but not 
prompt in doing good to others. He attains good fortune, is rich 
and is long-lived. 
Rahu in Fourth House. Not very intelligent; no happiness 
from brothers or .friends. This location is also adverse in respect of 
happiness from mother, father and wife or the native is hard- 
hearted and deceptive and is constantly worried. Little happiness; 
suffers from diseases of the stomach. Not very eloquent; untruthful 
in speech. But if Rahu be in Aries, Taurus, Gemini or Virgo, he 
gains from the government. 
Rahu in Fifth House. The native is timid but hard-hearted. 
He is intelligent and fond of learning. He speaks with a nasal 
accent and suffers from diseases of the stomach, abdomen, or either 
side of the belly; a female may have health troubles connected 
with the uterus. The native will pass an anxious time in expecta- 
tion of a son and may have one or two sons late in life. The 
native is worried; does not have peace of mind. He engages in 
work and is fortunate. He does not gain from government sources. 
His wife may suffer from stomach troubles. 
Rahu in Sixth House. The native is very valorous and long 
lived but is oppressed by enemies and evil planetary influences. 
He, however, overcomes his enemies and is happy. Suffers from 
teeth troubles, ulcers and wounds and also from anal diseases. 
The early period of life is not happy, but later, he is rich and 
strong, does not have happiness in respect of brothers, paternal 
or maternal uncles. On the whole, this is deemed a good location 
for the node, because it increases the physical as well as the 
mental stamina of the native and he comes out victorious, after 
struggles and strife. 
Rahu in Seventh Houre. The native is self-willed, proud and 
independent, but not very intelligent. He is clever, fickle and 
avaricious; is inclined to have liaisons, but in a male nativity it 
171 
may be adverse for virility. In nativities of either sex it impairs 
conjugal happiness; the partner may be lost or be sickly or non- 
co-operative. The native may lose money through contact or 
liaisons with women. His conduct is not commendable; he 
engages in disputes, suffers in family affairs and separation from 
Bandhus (relations). There is no peace of mind. 
Rahu in Eighth House. This is an evil position both for mental 
aptitude and physical health. The native is dilatory in work, resorts 
to unholy acts, is weak but inclined to much sexual activity. He 
may suffer from diseases arising out of imbalance of wind, ailments 
of the stomach, enlargement of glands or their imperfect function- 
ing, is sickly and may have an undiagnosed disease of the private 
regions, or may have infirmity of a limb. He has few sons. This 
location is adverse for a long life. He earns name and respect but 
his reputation is blemished. Friends forsake him. For financial 
prospects, the blessings are mixed; some times the native gains 
money, at others there is loss. He is oppressed by enemies. 
Rahu in Ninth House. The native is retaliatory in speech. He 
is evil-minded but intelligent; opposes his father or may not 
have much happiness in that respect. But he is firm and if benefits 
aspect the ninth house he may perform acts of religious merit. 
The native has fixity of purpose and does not abandon work once 
undertaken or lose determination. He has love for his brothers 
but is not fortunate in respect of sons. For worldly prospects of 
name, fame, wealth and splendour, this is an excellent position. 
Rahu in the Tenth House. The native is proud and fearless, 
fond of struggle and strife, but is engaged in work for others and 
does not have reliable friends. He is economical but this is not a 
factor for much wealth. The native has powerful enemies. The 
happiness in respect of parents is also impaired. He may have 
a few sons. The mind is constantly worried. In male nativities 
there is probability of liaisons with widows; gain from Mlechchhas ( 
non-Hindus). 
Rahu in Eleventh House. The native is wealthy and long-lived. 
He is intelligent, has good children, but the number of sons is 
limited. He travels a lot and has a large retinue. He is famous both 
in his own and the opposite camp. The native is industrious, 
engages in trade and business or perseveringly applies himself to 
work undertaken. Gain from Mlechchhas. (non-Hindus). The 
native is courageous, avaricious, and has an inclination to appro- 
172 
priate other people's wealth. He gains from good advice tendered 
by others. He is heroic in strife and overcomes his enemies. The 
health is generally good but diseases of the ear or deafness in 
advanced age are likely. 
Rahu in Twelfth House. This is an adverse location for health; 
the native is weak; eye-sight suffers, also trouble in the region of 
the heart or sides due to imbalance of "wind'; may also suffer 
from diseases such as oedema. The native is inclined to commit 
uncommendable acts in a secret manner, gains from secret 
financial dealings but there is heavy expenditure, at times through 
undesirable channels. His undertakings initially bring frustration 
but become successful finally. The native has an appearance of 
humility but is courageous; he is friendly with the wicked and 
antagonistic to gentlemen. If an agriculturist he has a large herd 
of cattle. The native wanders a great deal and falls from high 
position. This is an unfavourable position for the pleasures of 
the bed. 
Note: The above are the effects of Rahu, if not conjoined with 
another planet in the house. The effects would be coloured 
correspondingly according to the attributes of the planet associat- 
ing. If Rahu and Ketu are in Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, 
Virgo, Sagittarius or Pisces, the evil effects shown are less. It 
is good to have a node conjoined with a planet and particularly 
so if (i) Rahu is in an angle with the lord of a trine, (ii) Rahu 
is in a trine with the lord of an angle, (iii) in any other house 
with a benefic, (iv) in third, sixth or eleventh, with a malefic or 
a benefic. This applies to Ketu also. 
KETU IN THE TWELVE HOUSES 
Ketu in First House. The native is devoid of happiness, is 
a back-biter, avaricious, suffers some physical ailment or nervous- 
ness which keeps him restless and worried. He loses good posi- 
tion's. He is industrious, voluptuous, performs uncommendable 
acts. This location also impairs conjugal happiness. The native 
has few sons, no happiness from maternal uncle; trouble from 
relations, fear from opponents, ailment of the stomach. But Ketu 
in Capricorn or Aquarius mitigates evil influences. 
Ketu in Second House. An adverse factor for learning and 
wealth. The native's tongue is incisive and sharp and he may 
173 
even use foul language. There is loss of money due to govern- 
ment; opposition from relations, inharmonious relations with 
brothers. He likes to depend upon food of others or does not 
partake of wholesome food. He has an evil eye (a superstition 
current in olden times). There are diseases of the mouth. The native 
opposes others due to his malicious criticism of them. But if 
Ketu be in his own or exalted sign or in a benefic's sign, the 
rigour of the evil influences is much relaxed. The native then 
accumulates money and is happy. 
Ketu in Third Houre. The native is intelligent, strong and 
courageous. He has much fighting stamina and crushes his 
enemies. This location increases wealth, luxuries and strength, 
but the native is mentally much agitated due to disputes. He 
has little happiness from brothers, there may be premature death 
of a brother or no love last between the native and his brothers. 
The native applies industriously to work and is long-lived. There 
may however be pain in the arms. 
Ketu in Fourth House. An adverse factor for all fourth house 
affairs — land, fields, mother. The native fritters away paternal 
property due to bad friends. He is cruel, malicious and hypocrite; 
talks ill of others; does not live at his ancestral home. If Ketu 
be in his own house or exalted, then happiness pertaining to 
home is foretold. 
Ketu in Fifth House. The native has an evil nature, has 
malicious intentions, ailments of the stomach, trouble from 
Pishachas (evil spirits). The native's brothers are liable to get 
hurt; few sons and little happiness from them; afraid of water. 
But the native is fond of learning, engages perseveringly in 
work and is intelligent. Gain from cows. The mind is constantly 
worried. 
Ketu in Sixth House. The native is strong, famous and has 
fixity of purpose. He is oppressed by opponents but overpowers 
his enemies and achieves his objectives. The node herein generally 
bestows good health but there is trouble in the eye; also anal 
diseases. The teeth are weak. There is loss of wealth. The native 
is much liked by his relations, but does not fare well with his 
maternal uncles. A good position for general stamina and gain 
from cattle, but the period of boyhood is not happy. 
Ketu in Seventh House. This is an adverse position. There is 
much wandering and fear arising during travels and from water. 
174 
The native is attached to an unworthy woman; suffers separation 
from his wife or the wife may be sickly or not even tempered. 
Suffers from intestinal troubles or hernia. The native is avaricious 
and his conduct is low; heavy expenditure, mental worries, loss 
of vitality, fear from thieves; but if Ketu is in Scorpio the effects 
are in a great measure mitigated and the native makes money. 
Ketu in Eighth House. An adverse factor for longevity; piles 
and anal diseases, wounds, separation from dear ones, quarrels, 
opposition from all quarters. General effect of Ketu in eighth is 
poor but if aspected by benefics the native accumulates money 
and is long-lived. Also if the node be in Aries or Taurus, there 
is gain of money and of sons. If in Gemini, Virgo or Scorpio, 
then also gain of money after obstruction. Generally it is an 
unfavourable position for wealth. The native suffers from diseases 
of the stomach. He is oppressed by enemies; fear from cattle. 
The native covets others' money and wives. 
Ketu in Ninth House. The native is religious but has 
malicious inclinations and an uneven temper. He may be a 
religious hypocrite; is intelligent, proud, courageous and wealthy. 
He suffers in respect of father; there is pain in the body parti- 
cularly in the arms. Visits holy places. Gain from Mlechchhas ( 
non-Hindus). An adverse factor in respect of happiness from 
brothers. The ninth house is a good one but Ketu being a 
malefic mixed results follow. But if Ketu is conjoined with a 
benefic, the evil influences will be minimised. 
Ketu in Tenth House. The native is very courageous, pushing, 
popular and brilliant. He has knowledge of the Self and has a 
philosophical bent of mind; but affects happiness pertaining to 
both the parents, particularly from the father is adversely affected. 
The native causes distress to the father or vice versa, or the father 
may not be long-lived. The native's conduct is not always of a 
high order; he meets many obstacles, but overcomes them. He 
is good in mechanics; has little happiness from sons. The native 
is always on the move; travels much. The body shows excess of 
phlegm. There is fear from quadrupeds and conveyances. If the 
node be in Aries, Taurus, Virgo or Scorpio, the native crushes 
his enemies. The native is economical and accumulates money. 
Ketu in Eleventh House. An excellent position for the inflow 
of money, luxuries, good learning, popularity, authority, gain 
and success. The native speaks well, is contented, performs good 
175 
deeds and commands respect. But the native does not have good 
sons, and their number may also be limited. They are a source 
of worry to him. The native himself suffers from ailments of the 
stomach and anal disease. He is avaricious, industrious and 
engages perseveringly in work. 
Ketu in Twelfth Houre. This is an adverse location. The native 
indulges secretly in sinful acts. There is expenditure on unwhole- 
some objects and the native spends away money saved. He acts con- 
trary to good advice, but is victorious in disputes. He is worried; 
there is no happiness from the maternal uncle. There are ailments 
of the feet, in the regions of the navel and anus and in the eye. 
He is weak but voluptuous and conjugal happiness is impaired. 
The above delineation of the effects of the nine planets in the 
twelve houses is general, and is given here for a general under- 
standing of the individual influences and to arrive at the resultant 
effects after weighing the favourable and unfavourable factors 
of all the nine planets as distributed in the birth chart. The 
judgment, however, has to be applied against the background 
of the native. In India there are many crores of people whose 
income is only a few annas per day or less than one rupee per 
day and so how would effects pertaining to the inflow of money 
or wealth apply to them? Similarly, some of the planets in some 
houses have been described as making the native learned; half 
the population in India is illiterate. How will these effects apply 
to them? What we wish to emphasise is that the general principle 
of weighing the planetary effects against the background of the 
native should always be kept in mind. 
We would also sound a note of warning against judging loose 
moral conduct or sex-aberrations in the case of women. Extra- 
marital relations have been a feature of society since creation. 
But the moral and social values differ from society to society, 
and while in certain countries flirtation is the rule, in a place 
like India where the religious and moral fibre in this regard is 
strong, in many a hearts there might be a lurking desire which 
is kept unfulfilled due to self-control. Besides other mitigating 
astrological factors may set at naught one single factor due to 
the location of one planet. Beginners are therefore warned not 
to wreck family happiness by pronouncing judgments on such 
a delicate issue. 
176 
Again, reverting to the astrological principles, the following 
general rules should be kept in mind: 
(i) A planet in exaltation or own house shows the good effects 
fully. 
(ii) A planet in a friend's house shows three-fourths of the 
good effects. 
(iii) A planet in an enemy's house shows half of the good 
effects. 
(iv) A planet in debilitation shows one-quarter of the good 
effects. 
Conversely : 
(i) A planet in exaltation or own house shows only a quarter 
of the evil effects. 
(ii) A planet in a friend's sign shows half of the evil effects. 
(iii) A planet in an enemy's sign shows three-fourth of the evil 
effects. 
(iv) A planet in debilitation shows the evil effects fully. 
An additional rule which the readers will do well to bear in 
mind is that conjunctions or aspects of benefics increase the good 
effects and mitigate the evil ones. Conversely, the aspects or 
conjunctions of malefics decrease the good effects and increase the 
evil ones. 
CHAPTER 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF JUDGMENT 
in the previous chapters we have provided an outline of influ- 
ences and trends in character according to the sign rising and 
the placement of planets in signs and houses. Over and above 
these it should always be kept in mind that if a planet or a house 
is aspected by benefics, its quality improves. On the other hand, 
if the house or any planet is aspected by malefics, it is devalued. 
In the case of a house, if it is tenanted or aspected by its lord 
even though he be a malefic, he only strengthens the house and 
does not damage it. Jupiter, Mercury, Venus and Moon are bene- 
fics. Saturn, Mars, Rahu, Ketu and Sun are malefics. If a malefic 
tenants a house and is aspected by another malefic, it causes more 
damage to the house. For example, if Mars tenants the third 
house, it is evil for the native's brothers—either, a brother or 
sister may die prematurely or the native's relations with brothers 
will not be cordial. If under the circumstances, Saturn from the 
sixth house (by its tenth aspect) or from the ninth (by its seventh 
aspect) or from the ascendant (by its third aspect) fully aspects 
Mars, the results would be worse. On the other hand, if a benefic 
in a house is fully aspected by another benefic, the quality of the 
house tenanting the aspected planet is improved. For example, 
suppose Mercury is in the eleventh. Here Mercury improves the 
eleventh (house of gains). Now, suppose, Jupiter tenanting the third 
house fully aspects Mercury by its ninth aspect or Jupiter in the 
fifth fully aspects the eleventh (Mercury therein) by its seventh 
A.-12 
178 
aspect or Jupiter from seventh fully aspects Mercury by its fifth 
aspect, then Mercury's wealth giving powers in the eleventh are 
still further augmented. 
This principle of receiving malefic and benefic aspects should 
be applied to all the houses and planets. In Western astrology 
square or opposition aspects are considered evil, conjunction with 
a benefic is deemed good, while with a malefic, evil. But that is 
not so in Hindu astrology. 
A planet if exalted increases the good effects of the house he 
owns. Similarly if a planet occupies his own sign, he increases the 
good effects of the house he occupies and also of the other house 
he owns. The Sun and Moon however own only one house each. 
Some of these points have been referred to at the end of 
Chapter 6 and the attention of readers is invited to the princi- 
ples stated there. 
As regards the location of planets in houses, it is good to have 
benefics in the angles and trines and malefics in third and sixth. 
All planets, benefics as well as malefics, are good in the eleventh. 
Benefics are good in the second also, provided they are not lords 
of the seventh. It is best to have no planets in the eighth or the 
twelfth, but of the two sets of planets, benefics and malefics—the 
benefics in the eighth and the twelfth do not do as much harm as 
malefics. If the birth be during day time and the Moon is waxing 
and is in the eighth, it poses a danger to the longevity of the child. 
Similarly, if the birth be at night and the Moon is waning and 
occupies the eighth, there is danger of severe illness during child- 
hood. But if the birth is at night and the Moon is waxing, it 
preserves the child; and if the Moon is waning and in the eighth 
and the birth is during day time, the child does not die at a 
young age unless other detrimental factors are present. 
Some general principles as laid down by Sanskrit texts are 
given below : 
1. If there be at least one planet exalted or in his own sign, 
and that planet is conjoined or aspected by a benefic, the native 
leads a comfortable life, is rich and occupies a good position in 
life. 
2. When a planet instead of having a direct forward motion 
appears to recede in the zodiac, i.e., has a backward motion, it 
is called retrograde; this state is indicated by the letter R in the 
Ephemeris. A planet when retrograde, if not combust, is deemed 
179 
strong. He is considered strong, though he be in his debilitation 
or in an enemy's house. 
Planets in retrogression become strong, but if a planet is in his 
sign of exaltation and retrograde also, the efficacy of his being 
in his exalted sign is impaired. 
3. A planet in an angle is stronger than in a succedent house. 
The position in a succedent house is stronger than in a cadent 
house. 
4. Of the two kinds of friendship and enmity, natural and 
temporal, the natural is stronger than the temporal. 
5. In the elimination of dosha* and in adding beneficence, Jupiter 
is the most powerful. Venus has half the strength of Jupiter and 
Mercury one-fourth. But the Moon's strength serves as the basis 
of all strengths. The principle is that the Moon presides over 
the heart. A man who has a strong Moon has undaunted 
courage and courage is the secret of success. 
We now give below some additional principles, which should 
generally be applied in evaluating nativities. 
1. The 6th, 8th and 12th houses are known as Trik or Dusthanas. 
If the lord of any house tenants one of these houses, the efficacy 
of the house of which he is the lord, is impaired. For example, if 
the lord of the first house occupies the 6th, 8th or 12th house 
from the ascendant, the health and personality, individual efforts, 
pushing power (all these are judged from the first house) are 
impaired. 
If the lord of the sixth, eighth or twelfth house occupies any 
house, it impairs the house occupied. For example, if the lord of 
the eighth occupies the tenth, the father's longevity would be cur- 
tailed because the father is judged from the tenth. This will be 
particularly so if it is a malefic planet. 
An exception to the above rule is — 
(i) Lord of sixth in eighth or twelfth. 
(ii) Lord of eighth in sixth or twelfth. 
(iii) Lord of twelfth in sixth or eighth. 
These positions are not considered evil. 
2. The first, fourth, seventh and tenth houses are called angles. 
These are good places. Herein a planet is strong. If movable 
signs are on the cusps of fourth, seventh and tenth also, (Aries, Can- 
cer, Libra and Capricorn are movable signs, so if movable signs 
* The word has been explained on a subsequent page in this chapter 
180 
are in angles), the native would be active, pushing and dynamic; 
particularly so, if there are some planets therein also. If fixed 
signs are on the cusp of the angles, the native would be more 
fixed in his idea; will be thoughtful; he would not be inclined to 
move about much, would not like to travel, prefer to stick to the 
home and desire intellectual occupation or a profession where 
there is not much movement. Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius 
are fixed signs. If the signs on the cusps of angles are common, 
i.e., having the qualities of both movable and fixed signs, the 
native has some qualities of both the groups. Gemini, Virgo, 
Sagittarius and Pisces are common signs. One view is that the 
first fifteen degrees are of the nature of fixed signs and the latter 
fifteen degrees have the qualities of movable signs. 
Also examine whether the lord of the first occupies a movable, 
fixed or common sign and the inference drawn from the above 
should be drawn from this also. 
3. Each planet is a Karaka for some relation, matter or affair ( 
see Chapter 6 on planets). While judging the house or house 
lord also examine the Karaka. For example, if we have to judge 
about the father, we should not only take into account the tenth 
house and the lord of the tenth house, but the Sun also, who is 
Karaka for father. If we want to arrive at a judgment in regard 
to the mother, we should not only take into account the fourth 
house and its lord but also the Moon—Karaka for the mother 
also, and so on. 
4. There are twin principles for judgment. One is from the house 
and the other from Karaka. For example, judge the father 
from the tenth; judge father's wealth from the eleventh (second 
from the tenth), the father's brothers and sisters from the twelfth ( 
third from the tenth), the father's mother from the first, and so on. 
Similarly, judge the father from the Sun, the father's wealth from 
the second from the Sun (the sign next to that occupied by the 
Sun), the father's brothers and sisters from the third from the 
Sun, the father's mother and landed properties from the fourth 
from the Sun, and so on. 
To take another example, judge the wife from the seventh, the 
wife's wealth from the eight (second from the seventh), the 
wife's brothers and sister from ninth (third from the seventh), and 
so on. Similarly, judge the wife from Venus, the wife's wealth 
from the second from Venus (i.e., the sign next to that tenanted 
181 
by Venus), the wife's brothers and sisters from third from Venus, 
and so on. 
5. The effect of good or bad Yogas is felt during the Dasha 
and Antardasha of planets forming the Yoga. 
6. In the judgment of a house, the following factors must be taken 
into account. 
A. (i) Whether benefics or malefics tenant the house. 
(ii) Whether lords of benefic or malefic houses tenant the house. 
(iii) Whether the house is hemmed in by benefics or malefics. 
For example, if we have to judge about the fourth house, and if 
there are benefics in the third and the fifth on both sides of the 
fourth, the fourth house will be deemed to be hemmed in by 
benefics. If, however, there are malefics in the third and the fifth 
houses, the fourth house will be hemmed in by malefics. 
(iv) Whether the house receives the aspects of benefics or male- 
fics, if of both types of planets, examine which is stronger and 
in greater measure. 
(v) Whether the house receives the aspect of lords of good 
houses or evil houses. 
B. (i) Whether the lord of the house is well placed from the 
ascendant. 
(ii) Whether the lord of the house is well placed from the house 
he is the owner of, and which is under judgment. 
(iii) Whether the lord of the house is hemmed in by benefics 
or malefics. Suppose the Sun is at 26° of Scorpio and Mars is 
tenanting 20° of Scorpio and Saturn 29° of Scorpio, the Sun 
will be deemed to be hemmed in by malefics. If instead of the 
Mars and Saturn, there are Jupiter and Mercury on the two sides 
of the Sun, he will be deemed to be hemmed in by benefics. If 
there are no planets in the sign, judge from the planets in adjacent 
houses, that is, from the second and the twelfth signs, counted 
from the sign tenanted by the house lord. For judging the 
hemmed in position, we never go beyond the adjacent signs. 
(iv) Whether the house lord is combust. A planet is deemed 
combust when due to his nearness to the Sun he is not visible. 
For determining whether a planet is combust, refer to the end of 
this Chapter. 
(v) Whether the house lord aspects the house he is lord of and 
which is under judgment. 
(vi) Whether the house lord is conjoined with malefics or benefics. 
182 
(vii) Whether the house lord is conjoined with lords of good 
houses or evil houses. 
(viii) Whether the house lord is aspected by benefics or 
malefics. 
(ix) Whether the house lord is aspected by lords of good houses 
or evil houses. 
(x) Whether the house lord occupies his own house or is in 
exaltation or in a great friend's sign, a friend's sign or an enemy's 
sign or a great enemy's sign. 
C. (i) Whether the Karaka is well placed as counted from the 
ascendant. It is generally not considered good if the Jupiter Karaka 
for the second — is in the second, or the Mars Karaka for the third 
is in the third, or the Jupiter Karaka for the fifth is in the fifth, 
or the Venus Karaka for the seventh is in the seventh. 
(ii) Whether the Karaka is conjoined with benefics or malefics. 
(iii) Whether the Karaka is conjoined with lords of good or 
evil houses. 
(iv) Whether the Karaka is combust or with brilliant rays. 
(v) Whether the Karaka is aspected by benefics or malefics,- 
their strength and measure. 
(vi) Whether the Karaka is aspected by lords of good or evil 
houses. 
(vii) Whether the Karaka is hemmed in by benefics or malefics. 
7. Aspects of planets differ in strength and measure. This ex- 
pression may not convey its exact meaning to beginners and is 
therefore explained below. 
(i) Jupiter's aspect is good. But his 50% aspect would be greater 
in measure than a 25% aspect; similarly a 75% aspect would be 
greater in measure than a 50%, and a full (100%) aspect would 
be the greatest in measure. 
(ii) As regards strength, if Jupiter is in Cancer in his sign of 
exaltation, then the strength of his aspect would be greater than 
if Jupiter were in debilitation in Capricorn. The strength of 
aspect is proportionate to the strength of the planet aspecting. in 
the following decreasing order : (i) exaltation, (ii) own sign, 
(iii) great friend's sign, (iv) friend's sign, (v) neutral's sign, ( 
vi) enemy's sign, (vii) great enemy's sign, (viii) in a debilitated 
sign. 
(iii) There is also difference in the qualitative strength accord- 
ing to whether a planet is lord of good houses or evil houses. 
183 
For example, aspect of Mars in birth charts with Virgo ascendant, 
will be very evil—his tenancy will also be very evil because he 
will be the lord of the third and eighth houses. But in birth charts 
with Cancer as the rising sign, the aspect of Mars would not 
be so damning because he would be the lord of the fifth and the 
tenth—both good houses. 
(iv) In judging a house lord conjoined with or aspected by a 
benefic or malefic, due regard should be paid to the house lord- 
ship of the planet conjoining or aspecting. For example, for a 
person with Cancer rising, if Mars conjoins or aspects Jupiter 
with his seventh aspect, it will be a Sambandha of lord of the 
tenth (an angle). Mars, with Jupiter lord of the ninth (a trine) 
and will be a positive Rajayoga due to mutual Sambandha between 
the lords of an angle and trine and will be extremely good. On the 
other hand, if Taurus is rising and Jupiter and Saturn conjoin or 
have a full mutual aspect, it will have a dragging down effect on 
status and position, because the lord of the tenth (Saturn) will 
have Sambandha with the lord of the eighth and the eleventh ( 
Jupiter). These subtleties have to be borne in mind. 
8. In judging a chart, keep in mind the Yogas given in the 
next Chapter. These Yogas are exceptions to the general rule. 
9. (a) If a planet is owner of one good house and one evil, if 
he is strong he will show more good effects than evil ones; but 
if he is weak he will show more evil effects than good ones. 
(b) Excepting the Sun and the Moon, each of the other five 
planets is lord of two houses. If out of the two—one good and 
one evil he occupies the good house, he does not show the evil 
effect of ownership of the other evil house. For example, if Virgo 
is rising, Saturn will be the lord of the fifth (Capricorn) and the 
sixth (Aquarius). If he occupies the fifth house (Capricorn), his 
own sign, he does not damage the fifth house due to his evil lord- 
ship of the other house (sixth). 
10. Whether a benefic or malefic, if he is the lord of the 
ascendant, he does not damage the house he tenants or 
aspects. For example, if Aries is rising, Mars who is a 
natural malefic would be the lord of the first and the 
eighth and if he occupies the fifth house, he does not damage 
the fifth house due to his inherent malefic nature or due to his 
evil house lordship. Or if Scorpio is rising, Mars becomes 
the lord of the first and the sixth, an evil, house. But if 
184 
he tenants the fifth he does not damage the fifth house. 
11. All houses, first, second, third and so on, should be judged 
not only as counted from the ascendant but from the Moon sign 
also. In fact, some astrologers go to the extent of declaring that 
if the Moon is stronger than the ascendant, then the Moon sign 
should be given preference over the ascendant. In counting from 
the Moon sign, the sign occupied by the Moon will be the first 
house, the next sign would be the second house, the third sign, 
as counted from the Moon sign, would be the third house, and 
so on. Suppose a person has a strong Moon in Cancer; he is born 
at night in the bright fortnight of the month and the Moon is 
fully aspected by benefics. Now since the Moon occupies Cancer. 
Cancer will be the first house, Leo the second, Virgo the third, 
Libra the fourth, Scorpio the fifth, Sagittarius the sixth, Capricorn 
the seventh, Aquarius the eighth, Pisces the ninth, Aries the 
tenth, Taurus the eleventh, and Gemini the twelfth. In such a 
case we shall judge wealth from Leo (second from Moon), 
children from Scorpio (fifth from Moon), and so on. 
But even when the first preference is given to the rising sign 
or ascendant, the twelve houses from the Moon sign should be 
judged and the results arrived at by blending the influences 
pertaining to a house as counted from the ascendant as well as 
from the Moon. 
12. (a) If a malefic planet is in a benefit's sign and is aspected by 
benefics, his malignancy is softened, that is, he does not prove so 
evil. 
(b) If a benefic planet occupies a malefic's sign and is aspected 
by a malefic, his benefic powers are curtailed. 
13. We have discussed above that it is not good for any house 
lord to be in the sixth, eighth or the twelfth house, which are 
called Dusthanas or evil houses. We have also discussed that a 
planet should not be in his sign of debilitation. Now a relevant 
point for enquiry arises : suppose (a) the lord of a house or 
Karaka is in a good sign but in an evil place; alternatively sup- 
pose (b) the lord of a sign or Karaka is weak by sign position 
but well placed by house, say in the eleventh. Now of the two 
disqualifications (a) good by sign but evil by house position, and ( 
b) evil by sign position but good by house position, which is 
preferable? Our experience is that if we have to choose between 
the two evils (b) is better than (a). 
185 
This book is written with a view to be self-sufficient in regard 
to the subject matter dealt herein. A glossary of technical words 
with their English equivalents has been given at the end, but 
certain terms are so technical that no single word or phrase can 
describe the meaning of the Sanskrit word and while dealing with 
a point, if we explain the Sanskrit word at every stage, it would 
mean deviating too far and too frequently from the context. 
Besides, it is expected that readers of this volume will have 
occasion to study other works on Hindu astrology; readers may 
also have occasion to refer to the English translations of Sanskrit 
works on the subject. So, it becomes necessary to explain here 
some important terms, that are of a fundamentally important 
character. We have arranged them alphabetically for convenience 
of reference. 
SANSKRIT TERMS AND THEIR MEANINGS 
APACHAYA. The first, second, fourth, fifth, seventh, eighth, 
ninth and twelfth houses. 
ASTA (combust). The Moon is combust when it is within 12° of 
the Sun. Mars is combust when within 17° from the Sun. If 
Mercury is direct, it becomes combust within 14° from the Sun; 
but when Mercury is retrograde, it is combust within 12° from 
the Sun. Jupiter becomes combust when within 11° from the 
Sun. If Venus is direct, it becomes combust when within 10° 
from the Sun; but if Venus be retrograde, he becomes combust 
when within 8° from the Sun. Saturn becomes combust when 
within 15° from the Sun. These are the normal distances. If 
planets have very wide latitudes at the moment they would not 
become combust at the exact degrees specified above. But for 
practical purposes the above distances may be taken as correct. 
DOSHA. This is a Sanskrit word and used frequently in astro- 
logical literature. Literally it means a blemish, a 
disqualification, a pulling down weight, want of perfection, 
intermixture of unfavourable factors with favourable ones, a 
factor impeding good effects, an obstructing influence, a weakness 
to achieve and such other attributes on the negative side. Let us 
consider some of the Doshas. 
We shall first deal with those connected with signs. 
A planet in his sign of debilitation or in an enemy's or great 
186 
enemy's sign is considered weak and yields unfavourable results. 
Now we shall deal with a Dosha connected with houses. 
A planet in the sixth, eighth or twelfth house has Dosha 
because these three houses are considered evil. A malefic in the 
sixth is, however, not considered unfavourable. Under certain 
other circumstances, for example, when a planet in the eighth 
forms a Yoga, he is not considered evil. But these are exceptions. 
Generally speaking, planets in Trik are considered as occupying 
unfavourable positions. 
Let us now deal with the Dosha arising out of ownership of 
houses. 
(i) Lords of angles are considered good particularly when they 
do not own an evil house also they bestow good results during 
their Dashar and Antardashas. Lords of triangles, whether bene- 
fics or malefics, are always considered good. 
(ii) The lord of the eighth house is considered very evil. The 
two exceptions are when the sign Aries is on the ascendant or 
when Libra is rising, the lord of the eighth house is not considered 
evil. Also the Sun when Capricorn is rising or the Moon when 
Sagittarius is ascending are not considered as having Dosha, but 
the convention is that they are not altogether free from Dosha, 
but do have slight Dosha. In all other charts, i.e., when a sign 
other than Aries, Libra, Sagittarius or Capricorn is rising, the 
planet owning the eighth is deemed to have great Dosha. The 
Sun in Leo in eighth or the Moon in Cancer in eighth has no 
Dosha. 
(iii) Lords of the third, sixth and eleventh houses are called 
Papis and as such have Dosha. 
(iv) Lord of the twelfth, according to one school, has Dosha; 
but according to another school, if he is placed in a good house 
owns another good house or is conjoined with the lord of a good 
house, he has no Dosha. 
(v) Lord of the second owns the Maraka Sthana (death inflict- 
ing house). But when he is in company of the lord of a good 
house and situated in a good house, or owns another good house, 
he has no Dosha to spoil another planet's good prospects, though 
he himself might inflict harm. 
(vi) When the lord of a good house, say of an angle or a trine 
is also the owner of the third, sixth, eighth or eleventh house, 
though he is good due to lordship of a good house, yet he also 
187 
becomes evil due to owning a bad house and as such a good planet 
is considered as having a Dosha. 
The following are other factors which cause Dosha: 
(i) A planet who is combust is considered powerless or having . 
very little power to do good. If a malefic, he becomes more evil. 
(ii) Planets having crossed their lowest debilitation points and 
proceeding towards their highest exaltation points are considered 
good, while planets having crossed their highest exaltation points 
and proceeding towards their deepest debilitation points are con- 
sidered as having Dosha of Avaroha. 
(iii) A planet conjoined with Papas or aspected by Papas is 
considered as having Dosha. 
(iv) A planet conjoined with a planet who is debilitated or who 
is a Papa, or who is his enemy or great enemy is also considered 
as having Dosha. 
(v) The Dosha ascribed to conjunction in (iv) above is also 
produced if instead of conjunction there is aspect of the planet, 
who by conjunction would have caused Dosha. 
DUSTHANA. The sixth, eighth and twelfth houses are called 
Dusthanas or evil houses. Thus, it will be seen that the sixth 
house is both an Upachaya as well as Dusthana. For which pur- 
poses it is good and for which others it is evil is indicated in the 
context it is used. 
KARAKA. This is again a Sanskrit word frequently used in 
Hindu astrology and which cannot be adequately translated into 
English. Nor can the full connotation or complete meaning be 
conveyed in a single phrase or even a sentence. It can only be 
explained by bringing out the various meanings in all their aspects. 
The word Karaka is used in three senses : (i) as opposed to 
Maraka, (ii) significator of particular matters, (iii) significator of 
certain houses. Let us take these one by one. It is only after one 
has fully understood each of the meanings that one will be able 
to decide by the context in which the word occurs as to the sense 
which this word is expected to convey in that particular context. 
(i) One of the meaning of the word is 'that which does.' Its 
meaning in this sense is just opposite of Maraka. Karaka and 
Maraka are the two extreme points of an axis. One is good, 
the other is evil. If Karaka represents the positive, additive or 
benefit nature, the Maraka stands for negative, subtractive and 
malefic nature. KarakaAoos good, accomplishes, increases, brings 
188 
about fruition of efforts, produces good tangible results. Maraka 
on the other hand annihilates, frustrates, decreases, brings failure 
and does evil, kills, lowers the prestige, brings about illness, loss 
of prestige, etc. 
The lord of the first, fourth, fifth, ninth and the tenth houses 
are generally called Karakas. But when the lord of the third, sixth 
or eleventh house is in his own sign in the third, sixth dr eleventh 
house respectively, it can also prove a Karaka. So also the lord 
of the twelfth and the eighth can also prove Karakas if the lords 
are benefic and strong and occupy their own signs; but generally 
speaking the lords of angles (except the seventh) and the trines 
are called Karakas. 
(ii) The second sense in which the word Karaka is used is as 
significator for particular matters or houses. For this readers are 
referred to Chapter 6 on planets. 
(iii) The third sense in which the word Karaka is used is that 
each planet signifies certain matters, things, functions, aptitudes. 
The various constituents of the body, professions, tastes, learning, 
the functioning of the body, birds, beasts, metals, alphabet, kinds 
of cloth, merchandise, etc., have been divided and allotted to 
different planets. They have been given in Chapter 6 in detail. 
A planet is Karaka for the matters assigned to his portfolio. 
MARAKA. The word Maraka is a word in Hindu astrology 
the sense of which cannot be conveyed by a single word or phrase 
in English. Maraka literally means a killer, but a Maraka does 
not always kill. The planet described as a Maraka has a propen- 
sity to kill. The words To kill' are used to indicate extreme 
detriment physically, mentally, or financially, substantial lowering 
of status, political defeat, marked insult, conviction in a criminal 
case, mutinuous disturbance in the domestic sphere and such 
other evil effects. 
(i) The planets who are lords of the second or the seventh 
are Marakas particularly if they occupy the second or the 
seventh house. If a planet owns the seventh and the second—both, 
as for Aries and Libra, ascendants—he becomes a strong Maraka. 
(ii) The lord of the third, the sixth and the eleventh are Papis. 
Their relative strengths are as follows : lord of the third, one unit; 
lord of the sixth, two units; lord of the eleventh, three units. Being 
Papis, they have also Maraka qualities, but these three, if in their 
own houses in the third, sixth or eleventh, will not be Papis. An 
189 
eleventh lord, being the owner of the eleventh, would not bring 
financial loss, unless he is adversely placed, i.e., in a debilitated 
sign, in the eighth or the twelfth house, aspected by the lord of 
the eighth or the twelfth, or a Papi planet. The lord of the eleventh 
if in own house may produce Maraka effects in spheres other than 
financial, such as the father's death. 
(iii) The lord of the eighth, unless he is the owner of the first 
house also, proves a Maraka, but for Aries and Libra—as one 
and the same planet owns the first and the eighth—he is not a 
Maraka. For Sagittarius and Capricorn, the Moon and the Sun 
are the respective owners of the eighth, but they are not Marakas. 
(iv) The lord of the twelfth if conjoined with or aspected by 
a Marakarany evince Maraka propensities. 
(v) When a benefic owns an angle, if he be a Maraka on any 
of the above counts, e.g., lordship of seventh, his Maraka qualities 
are enhanced. The order in which the Maraka qualities are 
enhanced in increasing measure are the Moon, Mercury, Venus, 
Jupiter. Thus if Moon be the lord of the seventh, he will be a 
Maraka; if Mercury be the lord of the seventh, his Maraka qualities 
will be more than that of the Moon. If Venus owns the seventh 
his Maraka propensities would in such circumstance be greater 
than those of the Moon and Mercury; and if Jupiter owns the 
seventh, his Maraka propensities would be the maximum. 
(vi) The Maraka propensities of planets are enhanced if they 
occupy the second or the seventh, which are called Maraka places; 
particularly so, if the lord of the second or the seventh is in the 
second or the seventh. Of the two houses, the second and the 
seventh, the second is more powerful in Maraka propensities and 
thus it follows that the second lord is a stronger Maraka than 
the seventh lord and the second house is more fraught with 
Maraka propensities than the seventh. 
RAJAYOGA. A good indication for a good position in life, 
money, success, etc. 
SAMBANDHA. Sambandha is a Sanskrit word and in the 
general sense, it means connection, relationship; but in Hindu astro- 
logy the word has acquired a special meaning. There is no single 
word in English which can convey the full meaning of the astro- 
logical definition of Sambandha and it must therefore be explained. 
There may be Sambandha between two planets and therefore also 
between the houses they own, in one of the following ways : 
190 
(a) If the two planets are in the same sign. 
(b) If the two planets, say A and B, so occupy the signs that 
A is in B's sign and B in A's sign. 
(c) If A fully aspects B and B fully aspects A. This mutual 
full aspect is possible only if they are in signs which are seventh 
to each other or if Mars is in the tenth from Saturn, when both 
will fully aspect each other. The opposite signs are: 
(i) Aries, Libra; (ii) Taurus, Scorpio; (iii) Gemini, Sagittarius; 
(iv) Cancer, Capricorn; (v) Leo, Aquarius and (vi) Virgo, Pisces. 
(d) There can be Sambandha between : 
(i) Sun and Mars : if Mars is in Leo (Sun's sign) and fully 
aspects the Sun in Pisces. 
(ii) Sun and Jupiter: if Jupiter is in Leo (Sun' sign) and the 
Sun is in Aries. 
(iii) Sun and Saturn: if Saturn is in Leo (Sun's sign) and the 
Sun is in Libra or Taurus. 
(iv) Moon and Mars : if Mars is in Cancer (Moon's sign) and 
the Moon is in Libra or Aquarius. 
(v) Moon and Jupiter : if Jupiter is in Cancer (Moon's sign), 
and the Moon is in Scorpio. 
(vi) Moon and Saturn: if Saturn is in Cancer (Moon's sign) 
and the Moon is in Virgo or Aries. 
(vii) Mars and Jupiter : (a) if Jupiter is in Aries 'And Mars in 
Leo; (b) if Jupiter is in Scorpio and Mars in Cancer. 
(viii) Mars and Jupiter : (a) if Mars is in Sagittarius, Jupiter, 
in Cancer or Pisces; (b) Mars is in Pisces and Jupiter in Gemini 
or Libra. 
(ix) Mars and Saturn: (a) if Mars is in Capricorn, and Saturn 
in Leo; (b) Mars in Aquarius and Saturn in Taurus or Virgo. 
(x) Mars and Saturn: (a) if Saturn is in Aries and Mars in 
Gemini; (b) Saturn in Scorpio and Mars in Leo. 
(xi) Jupiter and Saturn: (a) if Jupiter is in Capricorn, and 
Saturn in Taurus or Virgo; (b) Jupiter in Aquarius and Saturn 
in Gemini or Libra. 
(xii) Jupiter and Saturn: (a) if Saturn is in Sagittarius and 
Jupiter in Aquarius or Virgo; (b) if Saturn is in Pisces and Jupiter 
in Taurus or Sagittarius. 
(xiii) Mercury and Mars : (a) if Mars is in Gemini and Mercury 
in Virgo or Capricorn; (b) if Mars is in Virgo and Mercury in 
Sagittarius. 
191 
(xiv) Mercury and Jupiter : (a) if Jupiter is in Gemini and 
Mercury in Libra or Aquarius; (b) if Jupiter is in Virgo and 
Mercury in Taurus or Capricorn. 
(xv) Mercury and Saturn : (a) if Saturn is in Gemini and Mer- 
cury in Leo or Pisces; (b) Saturn is in Virgo and Mercury in 
Scorpio or Gemini. 
(xvi) Venus and Mars : (a) if Mars is in Libra and Venus in 
Capricorn or Taurus; (b) Mars in Taurus and Venus in Leo or 
Sagittarius. 
(xvii) Venus and Jupiter : (a) if Jupiter is in Taurus and Venus 
in Virgo or Capricorn; (b) Jupiter is in Libra and Venus in Gemini 
or Aquarius. 
(xviii) Venus and Saturn : (a) if Saturn is in Taurus and 
Venus in Cancer; (b) if Saturn is in Libra and Venus in 
Cancer or Sagittarius. 
We have described above sambandha between two planets, 
where the planet A occupies the sign owned by planet B and A 
fully aspects the planet B. There is another variation of this, in 
which the planet A fully aspects B, where the B tenants the sign 
owned by planet A. The examples of this second category would' 
be as follows : 
(1) Mars in Virgo or Capricorn and any planet in Aries; 
Mars will have rambandhawith the planet in Aries. 
(2) Mars in Leo or Aries and any planet in Scorpio : Mars 
will have Sambandha with the planet in Scorpio. 
(3) Jupiter in Aries or Leo and any planet in Sagittarius; 
Jupiter will have sambandha with the planet in Sagittarius. 
(4) Jupiter in Cancer or Scorpio and any planet in Pisces; 
Jupiter will have sambandha with the planet in Pisces. 
(5) Saturn in Aries or Scorpio and any planet in Capricorn; 
Saturn will have sambandha with the planet in Capricorn. 
(6) Saturn in Taurus or Sagittarius and any planet in Aquarius; 
Saturn will have sambandha with the planet in Aquarius. 
In these examples from (i) to (xviii) the principle underlying is 
that the planet A should occupy a sign owned by planet B and 
should fully aspect the planet B. 
In the examples (1) to (6) given after the first set of examples, 
the principle is that planet A should fully aspect the planet B and 
the latter should tenant the sign owned by planet A. 
To put it succinctly there is sambandhabetv/een two planets 
192 
A and B if : 
(i) A occupies the sign owned by B and fully aspects B. 
(ii) A fully aspects B and B occupies the sign owned by A. 
Sambandha is a special feature of Hindu astrology and must 
be fully understood, because it is an important consideration in 
Hindu predictive astrology. 
TRIK. The sixth, eighth and twelfth houses. Each of these 
three is a Trik. The cumulative reference to Trik includes all 
the three houses, viz., the sixth, eighth and twelfth. The location 
of a planet in Trik is generally considered adverse. Malefics in 
the sixth are however not so bad. Benefics in the eighth or twelfth 
are not so bad. According to one school, benefics in the sixth may 
produce enemies, but as it is an Upachaya house, the ultimate 
result is good. See also Durthana. 
UPACHAYA. The third, sixth, tenth and eleventh houses are 
called Upachaya. A planet in Upachaya is considered strong, and 
particularly so, if it is not aspected by Papas or by planets who 
are enemies of the lord of the sign. See also Dusthana. 
YOGA. The word Yoga in Sanskrit means a combination: 
(i) a combination of two or more planets or a Sambandha bet- 
ween two or more planets, (ii) combination of a planet and a sign, 
(iii) combination of a planet and a house, (iv) location of 
planet in a particular sign or house and aspect over it of any 
particular planet and so on. Sometimes more than two 
ingredients qualify for a particular Yoga. But the minimum 
requisite is that two ingredients must be present to justify the 
use of the word Yoga. 
A Yoga may be good or bad. Sometimes the astrologers describe 
an evil Yoga as an Avayoga or an Arhubha Yoga and a good 
Yoga as a Shubha Yoga, or just as a Yoga. 
YOGA KARAKA. Five out of the seven planets own two houses. 
Generally one of them is good, the other evil. When a planet 
owns both good houses, one angle and one trine, he is called 
Yoga Karaka for a particular ascendant. Thus Saturn for Taurus 
and Libra ascendants, Mars for Cancer and Leo ascendants, Venus 
for Capricorn and Aquarius ascendants, would be Yoga Karaka. 
For Aries, the Sun and the Moon; for Scorpio also, the Sun 
and the Moon. For Gemini and Virgo, Mercury, and for Sagit- 
tarius and Pisces, Jupiter would be as good as Yoga Karaka for 
they two own good houses. 
CHAPTER 
YOGAS-COMBINATIONS OF PLANETS 
SOME important Yogar are given in this Chapter. This is with 
a view to cultivate the faculty of astrological appraisal and 
discrimination and also to examine the birth chart with reference 
to Yogar in a particular nativity. 
In ancient India, when texts on astrology were written, owners 
of large areas of land were common and the number of feudal 
lords who were called Rajas and Maharajas ran into tens of 
thousand. The number of armies was equally large and thousands 
of people were kings and commanders-in-chief. We have at places 
allowed the phraseology to remain as in the original texts. It is 
left to the readers to interpret them against the prevailing political 
and social background of the country in which the native is bom 
and brought up, or lives. 
The Yogas have been grouped under certain heads, but no 
strict arrangement has been followed with in the group, because 
each Yoga is independent of the other. 
I. YOGAS BASED ON ASCENDANT AS A FACTOR 
(1) If benefics occupy the second and twelfth houses as 
counted from the ascendant, it is called Shubha Kartari — kartari 
means a pair of scissors; here the second and the twelfth houses 
are analogous to the two blades. If malefics occupy the second 
and twelfth houses, as counted from the ascendant, it constitutes 
194 
Papa Kartari. The result of Shubha Kartari is good health and 
accumulation of money. The Papa Kartari makes the native sickly 
and poor. 
(2) If benefics occupy the second house from the ascendant 
and are not aspected by malefics, it makes Shubha Yoga. The 
native has a good face and is wealthy. 
(3) If Mercury, Jupiter or Venus occupy any of the three 
houses, namely, the sixth, seventh and eighth, as counted from 
the ascendant, it constitutes Adhi Yoga. The native is wealthy 
-and occupies a good position; if less than three are present the 
Yoga will not be so strong. 
(4) If all the three benefics, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus are 
in Upachaya houses (i.e., the third, sixth, tenth and eleventh from 
the ascendant), the Yoga is called Ati-varuman. The native is 
very wealthy. 
If instead of the three benefics, only two benefics are present, 
the Yoga formed is less powerful and would be the least 
powerful if only one benefic is in Upachaya. The Yoga is not 
marred if along with benefics, a malefic or malefics are also 
present. 
(5) If the ascendant occupies any degree from 0 to 3° 20' in 
Aries, Cancer, Libra or Capricorn or any degree from 13° 20' 
to 16° 40' in Taurus, Leo, Scorpio or Aquarius or any degree 
from 26° 40' to 30° in Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces, 
and is fully aspected by four planets other than the Moon, it 
constitutes a Raja Yoga. 
(6) If Capricorn be the rising sign, with Mars and Saturn 
therein, and the Sun and Moon are in Sagittarius, it constitutes a 
Raj Yoga of a high order. 
(7) If Capricorn be the rising sign with the Moon and Mars 
therein and the Sun is in Sagittarius, it is a good Raj Yoga. 
(8) If Aries be the rising sign with the Sun therein, Jupiter in 
Sagittarius and the Moon and Saturn are together in Libra, it 
constitutes a good Raj Yoga. 
(9) If Mercury, Jupiter and Venus be in the ascendant and 
Saturn in the seventh, the native is very rich and leads a very 
luxurious Life. 
(10) If Jupiter is in the ascendant, Saturn in the seventh and 
Sun in the tenth, the same results as in (9) above may be foretold. 
(11) If Jupiter be in the ascendant, Mars in the second, 
Venus and Sun in the fourth, the Moon in the tenth and Saturn 
in the 
195- 
eleventh, the native become a ruler. Planets should not be in their 
signs of debilitation. 
(12) If Mars and Saturn are in the ascendant, the Moon in the 
fourth, Jupiter in the seventh, Venus in the ninth, the Sun in the 
tenth and Mercury in the eleventh, the native becomes a mighty 
ruler. 
(13) If a strong Mercury is in the ascendant, a powerful benefic 
in the ninth and the other planets in the -second, third, sixth, 
ninth, tenth and eleventh houses (distributed in one or more) the 
native becomes a ruler. 
(14) If the longitude of Venus is in the initial 13° 20' of the 
sign Aries, and the sign Aries is rising and Venus is fully aspected 
by the Moon, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, the native occupies an 
outstanding and high position. 
(15) It the rising sign is Pisces and the rising degree is 
between 26° 40' to 30° and Venus also occupies a degree between 
26° .40' to 30° in Pisces, the native occupies a very high position 
in life. He may be equal to a king. 
(16) When Rahu is in the ascendant and the Moon, Mercury 
and Venus are in angles, the native's action are of a low order. 
(17) If Mars and Saturn together occupy the ascendant and 
the lord of the ascendant is in the second, eighth or the twelfth 
house and if the benefics do not occupy angles, the native will be 
sickly throughc 'it his life. 
(18) Jupiter :n ascendant, except in Capricorn, confers a good 
Yoga. 
(19) If Mars is in Aries, Leo or Sagittarius in the ascendant 
and is aspected by a friend, the native owns large properties and 
occupies a good rank. 
H LORD OF ASCENDANT AS A FACTOR 
(1) If the lord of the ascendant, the Sun and Moon are in 
angle or a trine (it is not necessary that they be together) in their 
respective signs of exaltation or own signs or in friendly signs, 
the Yoga is called Shri Kantha. The native would be a devotee 
of lord Shiva, highly religious, magnanimous and very illustrious. 
(2) If the lord of the ascendant is strong and the lords of the 
fourth and the ninth are in angles from each other, i.e., the lord 
of the fourth is conjoined with the lord of the ninth or in fourth, 
A.-13 
196 
seventh or tenth from the lord of the ninth, the native is learned 
and wealthy and commands a good position and lives a luxuri- 
ous life. 
(3) If Venus is not in Virgo or in an enemy's sign and 
occupies the second house and the lord of the ascendant is 
strong, the native is very wealthy and occupies a very eminent 
position. 
(4) If the lord of the ascendant is strong and conjoined with 
the dispositor of the Moon (the lord of the sign in which Moon 
is posited) and aspects the ascendant, he will occupy an eminent 
and powerful place in life. He will be of a pushing temperament 
and achieve success in life. 
(5) If the lord of the ascendant is in his sign of exaltation and 
aspects the Moon, the native acquires much wealth and the 
requisites for comfort and crushes his enemies. 
(6) If the lord of the ascendant is strong and the lord of the 
ninth is not only in his sign of exaltation but in the highest 
exaltation degree the native is of handsome appearance, very 
learned and famous, and blessed in respect of wife and sons. He 
owns large properties. 
(7) If the lord of the ascendant is weak and aspects the Moon 
which has no Pakshabala, the native is poor and leads a religious 
mendicant's life. 
(8) If the lord of the ascendant is in the second (in a sign 
which is not his sign of debilitation or his enemy's sign) and is 
conjoined with Venus, the native is very wealthy with various 
luxuries at his command. 
Ill SUN AS A FACTOR 
(1) If the lord of the fifth, Jupiter and Saturn are in their 
respective signs of exaltation, own signs or in friends' signs and 
occupy an angle or trine, the resultant Yoga is called Viranchi. 
The native will have knowledge of the 'self,' will be highly 
devoted and long lived, learned, much respected and will lead a 
happy life. If the Sun is also strong, there will be still better 
results. 
(2) If at birth the Sun is in the tenth degree of Libra, the 
native though born a king's son, lives on alms and charity. 
(3) If Sun is in Leo, except in 3° 20' to 6° 40' or 20° to 
197 
23° 20', and Mercury is in Virgo, the native though born in an 
humble position rises very high in life. 
(4) (i) If the Sun occupies any of the following degrees 
13° 20' to 16° 40' in Aries, Leo and Sagittarius 
23° 20' to 26° 40' in Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn 
3° 20' to 6° 40' in Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces 
(ii) and Moon is in Cancer, it is a good Raja Yoga. 
(5) If the Sun is in Aries in the ascendant, Jupiter and Venus 
in Pisces, Saturn in Libra and full Moon is aspected by Mars, 
the native will be a king commanding a large army. 
(6) If the Sun and the Moon are in the first half of Sagittarius, 
Saturn in the ascendant and a strong Mars exalted in Capricorn, 
the native becomes a mighty king of whom his enemies are 
always afraid. 
(7) If there is a benefic planet, other than the Moon, in second 
from the Sun, it constitutes Veshi Yoga, if there is a benefic 
planet, other than the Moon, in twelfth from the Sun it con- 
stitutes Vashi Yoga; if there are benefic planets in both adjacent 
signs to the one occupied by the Sun, it gives to Ubhayachari 
Yoga. All these three Yogas if formed by benefics are good for 
wealth and status. The converse is the case if formed by malefics. 
IV. MOON AS A FACTOR 
(1) If any planet other than the Sun occupies the second sign 
as counted from the sign occupied by the Moon it constitutes 
Sunapha Yoga. If any planet other than the Sun occupies the 
sign twelfth from that occupied by the Moon, this is called 
Anapha Yoga. If there are planets other than the Sun in signs, 
i.e., adjacent to the sign tenanted by the Moon, it is called 
Durudhara Yoga. The Sun in second or twelfth from the Moon 
does not mar the Yoga, but is not taken into consideration for 
constituting the Yoga. All these three Yogar are good for wealth 
and prosperity. 
(2) If there is no planet (Sun, Rahu and Ketu are not taken 
into account in Yogas 1 and 2) on either side (adjacent to the 
Moon sign), it is called Kemadruma Yoga and the result is 
poverty. There is one exception to this Yoga. If Jupiter is in the 
first, fourth, seventh or tenth house from the Moon, it cancels 
the Kemadruma Yoga. 
198 
(3) Adhi Yoga is also formed if instead of counting from 
the ascendant, the three benefics occupy the three houses — the 
sixth, seventh and eighth as counted from the Moon. 
In 1(3) and IV(3) above it is not necessary that Mercury, Jupiter 
and Venus be in the sixth, seventh or eighth house in regular 
order. They can all be in one house, or in any two houses or in 
three different houses; but these houses must be sixth, seventh and 
eighth. Nor is the Yoga cancelled if along with benefics there are 
malefics, though the power is impaired. If instead of the three 
benefics only one is present, 33% of the good effects will be 
felt; if there are two benefics, the good effects will be 66%, while 
if all the above three are present, good results will be obtained 
in full. Such a native is wealthy and occupies 4 good position 
in life. 
One point must be clarified. In considering this Yoga it has 
to be judged from the ascendant (See 1(3) above) or indepen- 
dently from the Moon. We cannot mix up the two by saying 
Mercury is in the sixth from the Moon and Jupiter seventh or 
sixth from the ascendant and so an Adhi Yoga is formed. If how- 
ever the Moon is in the ascendant, the Adhi Yoga will be formed 
by benefics in the sixth, seventh and eighth from the ascendant. 
This will be one Adhi Yoga. Another Adhi Yoga will be formed 
from the Moon. And thus a double set of Adhi Yoga will be 
formed which will be doubly good. 
(4) If all the three benefics, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus, are 
in the third sixth, tenth or eleventh house from the Moon, the 
Vasuman Yoga is formed. For result and other particulars see 
Yoga 1(4). 
(5) If the Moon is in the third, sixth, ninth or twelfth house 
from the Sun, the native is courteous, intelligent, learned, wealthy 
and clever. If the Moon is in the second, fifth, eighth or eleventh 
from the Sun, the above qualities are of medium order. If the 
Moon is in the first, fourth, seventh or tenth from the Sun, the 
above good qualities are at their minimum. 
(6) If the Moon occupies the degrees stated in No. 1(5) above 
and is fully aspected by four or more planets, the same results as 
stated in 1(5) above may be foretold. 
Note: By permutation and combination, this will give rise 
to 44 patterns of charts. 
(7) If the Moon is in an angle from Jupiter it constitutes Gaja 
199 
Kesari Yoga. The native is long-lived, wealthy and prosperous. 
If both the planets are in angles from the ascendant also, it is a 
more powerful Yoga. 
(8) If the Moon is in the sixth, eighth or twelfth house from 
Jupiter, it constitutes Shakata Yoga. The native undergoes a cycle 
of prosperity and adversity like a wheel: for a period he is 
prosperous and this is followed by a period of adversity, then 
again a prosperous period, and so on. If the Moon is in angle 
from the ascendant the above Yoga is not formed. 
(9) If the Moon and Jupiter are in their own signs or in their 
respective signs of exaltation and posited in the first, fourth, fifth, 
seventh, ninth or tenth house the resultant Yoga is called Gauri. 
The native leads a comfortable life and is well honoured by the 
government. 
(10) If the Moon and Mars are together, the native is always 
rich; of course the effects would differ in intensity according to 
the sign and house position and according to the houses these 
planets are lords of.. 
(H) If a full Moon occupies the fourth, seventh or tenth 
house and is aspected by Jupiter and Venus, the native verily 
occupies a very high position and has real splendour. 
(12) If the full Moon is in the ascendant in Taurus, Venus in 
Libra and Mercury in the fourth house, the native occupies a 
very high rank. 
(13) (i) If a strong Moon is in Cancer, and two planets occupy 
the ascendant, which is the own sign of one of the two planets 
and the exaltation sign of the other, the native occupies a position 
equal to a king. 
-(ii) If a strong Moon is in Cancer and only one planet in 
his own sign, or exalted sign tenants the first house, the same 
results as in (i) above but in less measure. 
(14) If the Moon and Venus are in angles and Papartenant 
the eighth or ninth house, the native suffers from epilepsy. 
(15) If a full Moon in the fourth, seventh or tenth house is 
fully aspected by an exalted planet or a planet in his own sign, 
even one born in a low family attains a kingly position. 
(16) If out of the three lords—lord of second or ninth or 
eleventh—any one is in an angle as counted from the Moon 
and if Jupiter be the lord of the second, fifth or eleventh, the 
native is wealthy and owns large properties. He also holds an 
200 
eminent position in life. 
(17) Full Moon in Pisces if aspected by a friendly planet 
confers Raja Yoga. 
(18) Full Moon in Taurus confers Raja Yoga. 
(19) If a white Moon (by inference full Moon) occupies any 
of the following degrees; 
(i) 13° 20' to 16° 40' in Aries, Leo or Sagittarius, 
(ii) 23° 20' to 26° 40' in Taurus, Virgo or Capricorn, 
(iii) 3° 20 'to 6° 40' in Cancer, or Pisces, and all the 
benefics—not conjoined with malefics are in angles, the native 
becomes a king or occupies an equally eminent position. 
(20) If the dispositor of the Moon (the lord of the sign which 
is occupied by the Moon) is in conjunction with the lord of the 
ascendant and occupies an angle (as counted from the ascen- 
dant) or tenants a great friend's sign, and secondly if a strong 
benefic aspects the ascendant the above setting of planets con- 
stitutes Pushkala Yoga. The native having this Yoga will be 
wealthy and earn name and fame for himself and will be 
honoured by the government. 
V. DAY AND NIGHT BIRTHS 
(1) If the Moon is strong in his own sign or in his sign of 
exaltation and (i) the birth be during day and if the Moon be 
fully aspected by Jupiter, the native will be wealthy; (ii) if the 
birth be at night and the Moon in his own sign or in exaltation 
is fully aspected by Venus, similar results may be expected. 
(2) If the birth be of a male, during daytime, and the ascen 
dant, the Sun and the Moon, all three are in odd signs, it con- 
stitutes Mahabhaghya Yoga. The native is wealthy and prosperous 
and occupies a good position in life. 
(3) If the birth be of a female, during night, and the ascend 
ant, the Sun and the Moon be in even signs, it also constitutes 
Mahabhagya Yoga and the lady has long life and conjugal 
happiness. She is fortunate and prosperous and has sons and 
grand sons. 
(4) If the Moon in Aries is in the ascendant and the time of 
birth be when half of the Sun's disc has risen at the eastern 
horizon, i.e., the longitude of the sign, degree and minute of the 
Sun coincides with the rising sign, degree and minute and if 
201 
Mars is in Capricorn. Jupiter in Sagittarius and Saturn in 
Aquarius, the native becomes a mighty ruler. 
(5) (a) If in a male nativity, the birth is during day and the 
longitudes of the ascendant, the Sun and the Moon fall in any 
of the male Nakshatras (constellations), the native is much res- 
pected and is very fortunate, learned and has sons and grandsons. 
(b) If in a female nativity the birth is during night and the 
longitudes of the ascendant, the Sun and the Moon are in female 
Nakshatras, the same results as in (a) above may be expected. 
The longitudes comprising each constellation are given in 
Chapter 1. 
Ashwini, Punarvasu, Pushya, Hasta, Anuradha, Sharavana, 
Poorvabhadra and Uttarabhadra are male constellations; (ii) Mri- 
gashira, Moola and Shatabhisha are eunuchs; (iii) the rest of the 
constellations are female. 
(6) If the birth be during day, during the bright fortnight ( 
when the Moon occupies 0° to 180° as counted from the Sun's 
longitude) and the lord of the first occupies his sign of exaltation, 
the native is learned, religious, long-lived, happy and owns large 
properties. He occupies an eminent position in life. 
VI. SIGN POSITIONS 
(1) If all the seven planets are posited in Leo, Virgo, Libra, 
Scorpio, Sagittarius and Capricorn, the native has push. He is 
courageous and is dynamic. All the six signs referred to need 
not be tenanted. 
(2) If all the seven planets are in Aquarius, Pisces, Aries, 
Taurus, Gemini and Cancer, the native is mild, prosperous and 
fortunate. All the six signs need not be tenanted. 
(3) If the benefics occupy angles and tenant the signs owned 
by benefics and the malefics occupy the signs owned by malefics, 
the native is wealthy and is a leader of daring people. 
(4) If Mercury is fully aspected by Jupiter, the native is very 
intelligent and wise and even eminent people abide by his 
advice. 
(5) (1) If one planet is in his own sign, the native's status 
will be in keeping with his family status; (ii) if the number of 
planets in own signs is two, he will be the head of the family; ( 
iii) if three planets are in own signs, the native will command 
202 
respect from the whole of his clan; (iv) if four planets are so 
placed, he will be very wealthy; (v) if the number of planets in 
own signs is five, he will lead a happy life; (vi) if six planets 
are so placed he will have all comforts and luxuries at his 
command and enjoy them; (vii) if seven planets occupy their 
own signs, he will be a king or equal to one and occupy an 
eminent position and have all the paraphernalia of royalty. 
(6) (i) If the number of planets in great friend's house is one, 
the native enjoys hospitality and food at other's cost; (ii) if the 
number of planets is two, the native is helped financially by his 
friends; (iii) if such planets are three, he will have the patronage 
of his kinsmen; (iv) if there are four such planets, he will receive 
help and assistance from his Bandhus (relations); (v) if five 
planets are in their respective great friend's signs, he will be 
the head of a tribe or institution; (vi) if there are six such planets, 
he will be the head of an army or a section of an army; (vii) and 
if all the seven planets are so placed, he will be a king or equal 
to one. 
(7) (i) If malefics are in the first fifteen degrees of odd signs 
or in the last fifteen degrees of even signs, the native is strong, 
pushing, industrious, very courageous and wealthy. 
(ii) If benefics are in the last fifteen degrees of odd signs or 
in the first fifteen degrees of even signs, the native is handsome, 
soft, benevolent and fortunate. His speech is sweet and manners 
endearing. 
(8) Venus aspected by Jupiter confers wealth. 
VII. EXALTATION OR OWN SIGNS 
(1) Mars or Mercury or Jupiter or Venus or Saturn, any of 
these five planets in his own sign or in his sign of exaltation, if 
occupying the first, fourth, seventh or tenth house from the 
ascendant or the Moon constitutes a Mahapurusha Yoga. 
Mahapurusha means a great man and the angular position of any 
of these five non-luminaries in an angle, as described above, 
ensures wealth and a good position in life. 
Thus Mars in Aries, Scorpio or Capricorn in an angle con- 
stitutes Ruchaka Yoga; Mercury in Gemini or Virgo in an angle 
constitutes Bhadra Yoga; Jupiter in an angle in Cancer, Sagit- 
tarius or Pisces constitutes Hansa Yoga; Venus in Taurus, Libra 
203 
or Pisces in an angle constitutes Malavya Yoga; Saturn in Libra, 
Capricorn or Aquarius constitutes Sharha Yoga. These are five 
independent Yogas comprised by Mahapurusha Yoga. 
(2) If three or more planets are in exaltation, the native 
becomes a king. Similar is the result if five planets are in their 
own signs. But if the malefics are strong, the native would be 
cruel; if benefics are strong, the native would be of a benevolent 
nature. 
(3) If the Sun is in Aries, Moon in Taurus and Saturn in 
Aquarius and one of these in the ascendant, it is a Raja Yoga. 
The native occupies a high position. 
(4) If Mercury is in Gemini, Jupiter in Leo, and Mars in 
Scorpio and one of them is in the ascendant, the same effects as 
in (3) above. 
(5) If Saturn and Moon be exalted and one of them is in the 
ascendant, and the Sun and Mercury are in Virgo, Mars in 
Aries, Jupiter in Cancer and Venus in Libra, this combination 
constitutes a powerful Raja Yoga. 
(6) If the Sun, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, all the four are in their 
respective signs of exaltation and one of these four is in the 
ascendant, it constitutes a Raja Yoga of a high order. 
(7) The Yoga given in (6) above is also caused when instead 
of the four planets above named, only three are in their respective 
signs of exaltation and one of them is in the ascendant. Same 
results as in (6) above but in lesser measure. 
(8) The Yoga in (6) above is also formed if instead of the 
four planets above-named, only two are in their respective signs 
of exaltation and one of them is in the ascendant and the Moon 
is in Cancer. Same results as in (5) above materialise. 
Note: By permutation and combination, (6), (7) and (8) will 
give rise to sixteen types of birth charts. 
(9) If the lord of the ninth and Venus be in their own signs 
or in their respective signs of exaltation and posited in the first, 
fourth, fifth, seventh, ninth or tenth house, it is called Lakshmi 
Yoga. The native is wealthy and enjoys a luxurious life. 
(10) If the lord of the sign, occupied by the lord of the ascen- 
dant is in his own sign or sign of exaltation in an angle or trine 
from the ascendant it constitutes a Yoga. The native is powerful, 
rich and owns lands. He is much respected. 
(11) Suppose X is the sign on the ascendant and A is the lord 
204 
of the sign. Now A is posited in sign Y and B is the lord of sign 
Y. Now suppose B occupies the sign Z and C is the lord of sign 
Z. Then if the planet C is in an angle or trine from the ascendant, 
in his own sign or sign of exaltation, the resultant Yoga is called 
Kahala. The native is very rich, benevolent, and wealthy. 
(12) If exalted Moon is in the ascendant and the Sun, Jupiter 
and Saturn are respectively in the fourth, seventh and tenth houses 
the native will no doubt becomes a king. 
(13) If Saturn in Capricorn is in the ascendant, the Moon in 
Pisces, Mars in Gemini, Mercury in Virgo, Jupter in Sagittarius, 
the native becomes a king. 
(14) If Mars be in Capricorn, Jupiter in Sagittarius and if 
Mercury in Virgo is in the ascendant, or if Venus in Pisces is 
in the ascendant, the native becomes a king. 
(15) If exalted Jupiter is in the ascendant, the Moon, Mercury 
and Venus are in Taurus, and the Sun in Aries, the native is very 
courageous and becomes a king. 
(16) If the Moon in Pisces is in the ascendant, Saturn in 
Aquarius, Mars in Capricorn, and the Sun in Leo, the native 
becomes a ruler. 
(17) If Mars in Aries is in the ascendant and Jupiter in Cancer, 
the native is endowed with many qualities and becomes a ruler. 
(18) If exalted Jupiter is in the ascendant and Mars in Aries 
is in the tenth, same results as in (17) above are expected. 
(19) If Saturn in Capricorn is in the ascendant, Mars in Aries, 
the Moon in Cancer, Sun in Leo, Mercury in Virgo, and Venus 
in Libra, the native becomes a mighty king. 
(20) If Mercury in Virgo is in the ascendant, the Sun in Leo, 
Venus in Gemini, Moon and Jupiter in the seventh, Mars and 
Saturn in the fifth, the native becomes a king. 
(21) If the lord of the tenth house is exalted, the native will 
be a minister to the king or occupy an equally eminent position. 
If the lord of the tenth is in his own sign or in a friend's sign, 
the effect is not so powerful as in the case of exaltation, but 
still the native commands good respect and position. 
(22) Even one planet exalted in the ascendant conjoined with 
a friend and aspected by a friend, makes one wealthy. 
(23) If three or more planets are exalted or in their own signs, 
and are in angles, the native becomes a renowned king if the 
native is born in a royal family. 
205 
(24) If five or more planets are exalted or in their own signs 
and are in angles, the native though born in an ordinary family 
becomes a king or equal to a king or holds an equally eminent 
position. 
Note: While judging 15 and 16 above please examine that 
there is no evil Ygga or Yogas and the planets are not combust 
VIII. HOUSE POSITIONS 
(1) If benefics are in the tenth house from the Moon, it 
constitutes Amla Yoga. The native will be of righteous conduct, 
benevolently inclined, wealthy and prosperous and will occupy a 
good position in life. 
(2) If benefics occupy the tenth house from the ascendant then 
also Amla Yoga is caused and the result will be the same as in 
(1) above. 
(3) (a) If Mercury, Jupiter and Venus occupy any of the 
following houses, first, second, fourth, fifth, seventh, ninth, or tenth, 
and (b) if Jupiter is in his exaltation or occupies his own or a 
friend's sign, Saraswati Yoga is formed. The- native will be very 
intelligent, learned, famous, and fortunate. He may be a good 
poet. 
(4) If Mercury, Jupiter and Venus or the Moon occupy the 
ninth house and are with bright rays, i.e., not combust, and are 
conjoined or aspected by friends, the native rises to a very 
exalted position. 
(5) If all the seven planets* occupy one sign, it is called Gola 
Yoga. The native would be poor and associate with low people. 
He will be devoid of wealth. His actions will be sinful. He will 
be indolent and will have a short life. 
(6) If all the seven planets occupy two signs, it constitutes 
Yuga Yoga. The native will be poor and a hypocrite. 
(7) If all the seven planets occupy three signs, it constitutes 
Shoola Yoga. The native will be cruel, ill-tempered and lead an 
indigent life. 
(8) If the seven planets occupy four signs, it is called Kedara 
Yoga. The native will own agricultural lands and will be rich. 
(9) If all the seven planets are in five signs, the Yoga is called 
* Whenever there is reference to seven planets, it means Sun, Moon. 
Mars. Mercury, Jupiter, Venus & Saturn. 
206 
Pasha. The native will have financial affluence, good relatives, 
will be of good conduct, and enjoy life. 
(10) If the seven planets occupy six signs, the Yoga is called 
Dama. The native will be benevolently inclined, generous, and 
occupy a good position in life. 
(11) If the seven planets occupy seven signs, it constitutes 
Veena Yoga, it is also called Vallaki Yoga. The native will be 
fond of singing, dancing, and all arts and will be rich. 
(12) In Yogas (5) to (11) above, the locations of planets need 
not be in contiguous signs. We are now describing twelve Yogar 
in which the seven planets occupy seven contiguous signs. If all 
the seven planets occupy seven contiguous signs and no sign in 
between is untenanted by a planet, then: 
(i) from the first-to the seventh house, the native occupies a 
kingly position and had a host of conveyances. 
(ii) from the second to the eighth house, the native is good- 
looking, very wealthy, persevering, endowed with many virtues, 
occupies a Very high position, and is devoted to his father; 
(iii) from the third_ to the ninth house, the native is -very 
courageous and wealthy. He occupies a high rank but is sickly; 
(iv) from the fourth to the, tenth house, the native enjoys the 
luxuries of many kinds, is very generous, and occupies a 
kingly position; 
(v) from the fifth to the eleventh house, the native performs 
Yajnas (religious sacrificial worship according to religious codes), 
he earns name and fame and occupies an outstandingly respected 
position; 
(vi) from the sixth to the twelfth house, the native is generally 
very poor; only occasionally he will have a little money or 
comforts; 
(vii) from the seventh to the first house, the native is the 
darling of many damsels and occupies a good rank in life; 
(viii) from the eighth to the second house, the native will be 
long-lived, but without wealth; he will be henpecked or under the 
influence of women; 
(ix) from the ninth to the third house, the native is devoted 
to religious austerities and worship. He is endowed with many 
qualities and occupies a good position in life. He is wealthy 
and prosperous; 
(x) from the tenth to the fourth house, the native pursues 
207 
useful activities. He is devout and religious and is respected by 
gentle folk; 
(xi) from the eleventh to the fifth house, he has-a good woman 
as his wife, possesses" -precious jewellery and is a capable 
administrator; 
(xii) from the twelfth to the sixth house, the native spends 
very heavily; is respected everywhere. 
In these twelve kinds of Malika Yogas, also called Ekavali, 
one planet in each sign successively—consideration has to be 
paid whether the signs occupied are signs of exaltation, own 
signs or signs of friends or enemies or signs of debilitation. For 
example, if the Moon is in Cancer, the Sun in Leo, Mercury in 
Virgo, Venus in Libra, Mars in Scorpio, Jupiter in Sagittarius, 
and Saturn in Capricorn it will be a powerful Malika Yoga. 
Conversely, if the planets are in their signs of debilitation or 
in enemies' signs, this will not be able to do much good. 
The placement of lords of houses and other features also 
form important factors on which astrological delineations are 
based and naturally different shades of effects will be produced 
according to the blending of influences. 
(13) If all the benefics occupy the fifth, sixth and seventh 
houses from the ascendant, this constitutes Shubha Mala Yoga. 
The native will be wealthy and occupy a good position in life. 
(14) If all the benefics occupy the sixth, eighth and twelfth 
houses from the ascendant, it is called Ashubha Mala Yoga and 
the result is evil. There will be heavy expenses and the native 
will not be happy. 
(15) If Venus in Taurus or Libra is in the fourth, the Moon 
in the ninth and other planets in the third, sixth and eleventh, 
the native owns land and rules over it. 
(16) If the Moon, Venus and Saturn are in angles, Mars in the 
eighth and the Sun in the twelfth (or both Sun and Mars in the 
eighth or twelfth), the native does not stick to one place and has 
to face adversities in life. 
(17) If there are planets in the ascendant, fourth, seventh, 
ninth and tenth houses and no planets occupy the eighth and 
twelfth, it is a very good Yoga. The native occupies an important 
position, has religious and benevolent inclinations, is courteous, 
learned and wealthy. 
(18) If all the planets are in the first, fourth, seventh and 
208 
tenth houses, the native is very fortunate and occupies a pro- 
minent position. This Yoga is called Mangal. 
(19) If all the planets are in the second, fifth, eighth and 
eleventh houses, it is called Madhya Yoga. The effect is moderate 
wealth and position. Sometimes the native accumulates money; 
at othertimes he is poor. 
(20) If all the planets are in the third, sixth, ninth and twelfth 
houses, the Yoga is called Kleeva (literally, the word means 
impotent, but in this context it means powerless). The native 
does not succeed in attaining a high position or accumulating 
wealth. He generally leads a static existence and happiness and 
comforts are not his. 
(21) If the Moon and Mars are together in the ascendant and 
Jupiter is in the ninth or tenth house from the ascendant and 
the Sun is strong, the native will be wealthy and occupy a high 
position in life. 
(22) If Mars and Saturn be in the first, fifth or tenth house 
and the full Moon occupies the ninth house, the native occupies 
a very high rank. 
(23) If all the planets occupy angles and trines and any of 
them is in his sign of exaltation, the native becomes a king or 
equal to a king; is very generous and leads a luxurious life. 
(24) (i) If the native is born on a Tuesday or Saturday and 
if the Sun and the Moon are in the first, fifth or ninth house and 
if Jupiter is in the third, or in an angle from the ascendant, the 
native will be fickle-minded like an insane person. 
(25) If the Moon and Mercury are in angles from the ascendant 
and are not aspected by their dispositors nor are they conjoined 
with other planets, the native may suffer from schizophrenia or 
insanity. 
(26) If the Moon and Jupiter together are in an angle and 
aspected by Venus, this confers great wealth and a good position 
provided that there is no planet in debilitation. 
IX. LORD OF FIRST TO TWELFTH HOUSES 
(1) (a) If the lord of the first, second, fourth, fifth, seventh, 
ninth, tenth or the eleventh house mutually changes place with 
any of the lords of houses grouped above, it is a Maha Yoga. For 
example, the lord of the first in the eleventh and the lord of the 
209 
eleventh in first or lord of the second in the eleventh and lord of 
the eleventh in the second; or lord of the fourth in the tenth and 
lord of the tenth in the fourth, and so on. There is increase in 
respect of good luck pertaining to the houses involved. 
(b) If any lord of the first, second, fourth, fifth, seventh, ninth, 
tenth or the eleventh house changes place with the lord of the 
third, it is called Khala Yoga. For example, the lord of the tenth 
is in the third and the lord of the third in the tenth; or the lord of 
the third in the fourth and the lord of the fourth in the third. 
This is a bad Yoga called Khala. 
(c) If the lord of a house stated in clause (a) above changes 
place with the lord of the sixth, eighth or twelfth house, it is called 
Dainya Ycga. 
The sixth, eighth and twelfth houses are called Trik. They 
are also called Dusthanas. So if the lord of the first, second, fourth, 
fifth, seventh, ninth, tenth or the eleventh house exchanges place 
with the lord of a Trik, it will constitute Dainya Yoga, a pulling 
down weight for luck and prosperity. Dainya Yoga is worse than 
Khala Yoga. 
Thus by permutation and combination there will be 66 yogas. 
(i) Lord of the first, second, fourth, fifth, seventh, ninth, 
tenth or eleventh house mutually changing places : 28 Yogas ( 
Maha Yoga). 
(ii) Lord of the twelfth changing places with lords of the 
remaining eleven houses : 11 Yogas (Dainya Yoga). 
(iii) Lord of the eighth changing places with lords of houses 
from first to eleventh : 10 Yogas (Dainya Yoga). 
(iv) Lord of the sixth changing places with lords of any house 
from first to eleventh (except 8th covered by (iii) above): 9 Yogas ( 
Dainya Yoga). 
(v) Lord of the third changing place with lords of the first, 
second, fourth, fifth, seventh, ninth, tenth or eleventh : 8 Yogas ( 
Khala Yoga). 
Thus we get 28 Maha Yogas, 8 Khala Yogas and 30 Dainya 
Yogas. In the delineation of effects, the sign positions, whether 
by changing places a planet will be occupying his sign of exaltation 
or own sign or a sign of debilitation should be attached due 
weight. 
For example, if the rising sign is Scorpio, the lord of the first ( 
Mars) occupies the ninth (Cancer, the sign of debilitation of 
210 
Mars) and the ninth lord (Moon) occupies the first (Scorpio, the 
sign in which the Moon is debilitated). This cannot be so power- 
ful a combination for good as when Leo is rising and the lord of 
the ninth (Mars) is in Leo in the first and the lord of the first 
exalted in Aries in the ninth. 
This principle has also to be applied to Dainya Yogar. Suppose 
Libra is the rising sign and the lord of the first (Venus) is exalted 
in the sixth and the sixth lord (Jupiter) is in the first. This will 
not be so evil. All these different shades arising out of sign 
positions must be taken into account. Here we have stated the 
goodness or otherwise arising out of a mutual exchange of places 
between house lords. 
(2) If a house is tenanted by a benefic or aspected by benefics 
and the lord of the house is well placed and in his own sign or 
sign of exaltation and not combust, twelve Yogas (one pertaining 
to each house respectively) are formed. If the house and house 
lord fulfil the conditions laid down above and it is the — 
(i) first house: the Yoga is Chamar. One born in this Yoga 
gains eminence and prosperity like a waxing moon. He is wealthy, 
long-lived, famous and occupies a high position. 
(ii) second house: the Yoga is Dhenu. The native will have 
delicious food and drinks and be learned, and wealthy, and have 
a large family. 
(Hi) third house: the Yoga formed is Shourya. The native's 
younger brothers will be famous and respect the native; he will 
himself be very courageous, earn name and fame and will engage 
in governmental work. 
(iv) fourth house: the Yoga constituted is Jaladhi. The native 
has agricultural lands, cattle, property, conveyances, a good wife 
and home comforts. He will engage in governmental work; will 
also be inclined to construct wells and tanks. He holds a good 
position in life. 
(v) fifth house: the Yoga formed is Chhatra. The native will 
have a happy home life, a good wife and children. He will speak 
sweetly; be intelligent and learned. The native earns a good 
name and fame and will be a minister, counseller or adviser to 
the government or hold an equally eminent position. 
(vi) sixth house: the Yoga is called Astra. The native is 
strong, proud and powerful. He subdues his opponents by sheer 
force.--He has undaunted courage and a combative spirit and 
211 
may have scars of wounds on his body. 
(vii) seventh house: the Yoga constituted is Kama. He will 
have a good wife and children and will be attached to his own 
wife. He will rise to a rank higher than that of his father, and will 
be prosperous and happy. 
(viii) eighth house: the Yoga is called Asura The native is 
selfish, a back-biter and malevolent, always causing harm to 
others. He is poor and commits low acts and has to face trouble 
due to them. In short, the temperament, the inclination and 
behaviour are malevolent and he suffers in life. 
(ix) ninth house: the Yoga formed is Bhagya because the 
ninth house is called Bhagya—which means good luck and pros- 
perity of all kinds. The native will be lucky and prosperous in 
all respects, wealthy, command respect and occupy a good posi- 
tion in life. He will be religious and devoted to God. 
(x) tenth house: the Yoga constituted is Khyati, which in 
Sanskrit means fame. The native will be wealthy and prove a 
pod ruler or administrator. He will be renowned. 
(xi) eleventh house: the Yoga is called Suparijata. The native will 
have a good income and will be wealthy; he will have a large 
family and there will be a chain of auspicious festivities. He will 
be learned, fond of hearing religious discourses and be of a : 
righteous conduct. 
(xii) twelfth house: the Yoga formed is called Musala, which 
in Sanskrit" means a big pestle. The native will become wealthy 
by earning money through much hard labour and difficulties, 
he will spend money only on worthy objects; he will be very 
active and talkative; will be over-powered by his opponents. After 
death he attains heaven. 
Note: For judging the effects of a house, how far the Yoga 
is fulfilled, five factors must be present : (i) the house should be 
tenanted by a benefic; (ii) the house should be aspected by a 
benefic or benefics; (iii) the house lord should not be combust; ( 
iv) the house lord should be in an angle or trine or in a good 
place; (v) the house lord should be in his own sign or sign 
of exaltation. Though it has not been stated in the text, yet if any 
of the following adverse factors are present, the Yoga will he 
tarnished and will be incapable of giving rise to the full effects of 
the Yoga: (i) If malefics tenant the house; in this the connection it 
has to be borne in mind is that a malefic in his own sign is not evil; 
212 
but a malefic in his own house, if it is in the twelfth house from 
the ascendant it will give rise to heavy expenditure, (ii) The 
house is aspected by malefics. (iii) The house lord is in undesirable 
degrees. For undesirable degrees for each planet in each sign 
readers are referred to Chapter 8. (iv) If the house lord is conj 
oined-with or aspected by malefics. 
Again, all benefics will not behave equally. Jupiter is a benefic 
but he will have different shades of effects, (i) according to the 
sign he is in, as for example, Jupiter in Cancer will be far 
different from Jupiter in Capricorn; (ii) according to the house of 
which the planet is the lord, as for example, Jupiter as lord of 
the first and the fourth house will have effects which Jupiter as 
lord of the third and the sixth cannot have. 
Therefore, readers are requested to develop their own faculties 
of discrimination and judgment which is necessary to appraise an 
individual chart. No set of rules can provide for all contingencies 
and all the permutations and combinations possible. 
(3) If the lord of a house is in an evil place* or the house 
tenants or is aspected by a malefic, twelve Yogas—one for each 
house-arise : if the house affected is the — 
(i) first house: the Yoga is called Avayoga, which in Sanskrit 
means a bad Yoga. The native has an uneventful life of poverty. 
He will suffer many humiliations; his company will be of low 
and wicked people. This Yoga impairs health and longevity is 
curtailed. 
(ii) second house: the Yoga constituted is known as Niswa, 
which in Sanskrit means without wealth. The native has bad 
teeth, poor eye-sight or the eyes may have some defects; his 
power of speech is not good; his enemies appropriate his wealth; 
he is neither intelligent nor learned. 
(iii) third house: the Yoga formed is Mriti. The native is 
without brothers or there is no happiness from them. His wealth 
and strength are undermined; he is not even tempered; his 
efforts are misdirected and end in failure and frustration. The 
native lacks in courage and there is a latent feeling of timidity 
or an inferiority complex. 
(iv) fourth house: the Yoga is known as Kuhu. The native 
suffers in respect of his mother, conveyances, friends, relations, 
* The 6th, 8th and 12th are called evil places. This group of houses is 
called Trik or Dusthana. 
213 
apparel and happiness. The fourth house is the house of ease, 
comfort, mental tranquillity and happiness and all these are 
curtailed. He suffers in respect of his position and property also. 
He is attached to an unworthy woman who may be his own wife 
or some other woman. 
(v) fifth house: the Yoga so formed is called Pamara. The 
native tells lies; he lacks in the finer sense of discrimination, 
cheats others, does not believe in God or religion; has evil 
company. He may have no sons or there may be premature 
death of sons or no happiness from them. 
(vi) sixth house: the Yoga is called Harsha, which in Sanskrit 
means happiness or delight. If the sixth lord is placed in a 
Dusthana, it gives rise to happy circumstances. The native has a 
strong body; he does not indulge in evil acts and has no 
evil intentions; he enjoys happiness, luxuries and good fortune; 
overcomes his enemies; is a favourite of eminent people; has 
wealth, good friends and sons and earns name and fame for 
himself. 
(vii) seventh house: the Yoga has been named Dushkrit 
(which literally means evil actions). The result is separation, 
inclination for liaisons with others' wives, wandering aimlessly, 
venereal or urinary diseases such as spermatorrhoea, diabetes; 
trouble from government. The native is despised by his relations 
and suffers. 
(viii) eighth house: the Yoga is called Sarala, which means 
easy. It is good to have the eighth lord in the sixth or eighth or 
twelfth house. If a malefic, he would spoil the twelfth, but 
whether a benefic or malefic, if the lord of the eighth is in a 
Dusthana it fortifies the eighth house. The native is long-lived, 
of a strong mind, fearless, learned, wealthy, blessed with sons. 
He overcomes his enemies, is famous and the work he undertakes 
is accomplished successfully. 
(ix) ninth house: the Yoga is called Nirbhagya which 
means luckless. He brings about ruin of immoveable ancestral 
property by neglect, or by mortgaging or selling it away 
under financial pressure; is irreligious, talks ill of and does not 
respect his religious preceptors and ascetics; is poorly dressed, 
and suffers much distress. 
(x) tenth house: the Yoga is known as Duryoga. Whatever 
the native undertakes, despite his strenuous efforts, ends in 
214 
frustration and disappointment. He suffers humiliation in society, 
lives at a place other than his homeland and leads an unhappy 
life. The native is antagonistic to others and suffers distress. 
(xi) eleventh house: this Yoga is known as Daridra, which 
means poverty. The native incurs heavy debts and is poor. He 
is not good tempered; has no good brothers; may suffer from 
diseases of the ear. He runs errands for others, i.e., occupies a 
subordinate position. His speech is not good and his actions are 
not commendable. 
(xiii) twelfth house: the Yoga is called Vimala, which means 
free from blemish. Like the lords of the sixth and the eighth, 
it is good for the lord of the twelfth to be in Trik or Dusthana. 
The native does not spend much and accumulates wealth; is 
agreeable to all people and is liked by them. He leads an in- 
dependent life and is happy. He follows an honourable profession 
and is known for his good qualities. 
X. LORDS OF HOUSES 
(1) If the lord of the second is in the eleventh and the lord 
of the eleventh in the second or both of them are in angles 
from the ascendant, there is good gain of money. 
(2) If the lord of the ninth, Mercury and Venus be in their 
respective signs of exaltation or in own signs or in their friends' 
signs and occupy an angle or a trine, though all the three need 
not be together, it is called Shrinatha Yoga. The native would be 
a devotee of lord Vishnu, highly religious, learned, free from 
malice, rich and lead a happy and comfortable life. He will 
command much respect and will have a good wife and sons. 
(3) If the lord of the ninth house is strong in own sign or 
exaltation in the ascendant, the third or the ninth, the native is 
powerful and influential. 
(4) If the lords of the ninth and tenth are together in a good 
house (i.e., other than 6th, 8th, 12th and 3rd), it is a powerful 
Raja Yoga. The native is fortunate and occupies a high position. 
(5) If in (4) above, if the combination occurs in an angle or 
trine it is called Shankha Yoga. The same results as in (4) above 
but in greater measure. 
(6) If the lord of the tenth is in the ninth and the lord of the 
ninth in the tenth, the native occupies a high position and is in 
215 
the good books of the government. 
(7) If the lords of the sixth, eighth and the twelfth are strong 
and occupy angles or trines and if the lords of the first, fourth, 
ninth and tenth ark- in the sixth, eighth and twelfth, and if the 
planets are without strength or are combust, then there is Duryoga 
or evil Yoga leading to all kinds of evil results. But if the reverse 
is the case, that is, if the lords of Trik are in any of the Dusthanas 
and the lords of the first, fourth, ninth and tenth are strong and 
occupy good houses and if the planets are strong and not combust, 
the nativity becomes a good one for long life, happiness, prosperity 
and good position in life. 
(8) If the lord of the ninth is in the twelfth, a weak lord of 
the twelfth is in the second and Papas in the third, the native is 
licentious, indulges in evil acts, incurs debts and procures enjoy- 
ment thereby; he is always in need of favours and money from his 
friends. 
XI. DIRECTIONAL STRENGTH 
(1) If two or more planets have directional strength and the 
native is born in a royal family he becomes a king. 
(2) If out of Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus, 
five have directional strength or even four, a person born even in 
an ordinary family becomes a king or occupies an equally eminent 
position, such as, the head of a large institution, a minister in the 
Union or State cabinet. 
XII. PLANETS IN DEBILITATED SIGNS 
(1) If a planet is in debilitation and if the lord of the sign 
in which the debilitated planet is or the lord of the sign in which 
the debilitated planet would be exalted is in an angle from the 
ascendant or the Moon the evil effect of debilitation is cancelled 
and the native prospers. 
(2) If a planet is debilitated but is retrograde, it becomes power- 
ful. This applies to Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn. 
(3) When planets occupy their signs of debilitation or are in „ 
an enemy's house, the native leads a life of poverty and distress. 
He is not intelligent or learned and his actions are bad. (Refer 
to Chapter 8, Planets in signs). If the planet occupies the good 
216 
degrees stated therein, the evil is mitigated. 
(4) If a planet is in his sign of debilitation and if he is fully 
aspected by his dispositor (the lord of the sign in which the 
planet is), the debilitation is cancelled and good effects follow. 
(5) If a planet is debilitated and if the lord of the sign the 
planet is in, and the lord of the sign in which the debilitated 
planet would be exalted, are together or in opposite signs or in 
the fourth and tenth from each other, the debilitation is cancelled 
and a good Yoga is formed. 
XIII. RETROGRADE PLANETS 
Even a single planet, though he be debilitated, if occupying a 
good house is retrograde and not combust, it raises high the 
native's status. Should there be two or three such planets, the 
native attains a very high rank and position in life. 
KENDRA TRIKONA YOGA 
The Kendra-Trikona Yoga is abbreviated to as K.T. Yoga. The 
first, fourth, seventh and tenth houses are called Kendras or 
angles. The fifth and the ninth houses are called Trikonas or 
trines. The first house is both a Kendra and a Trikona. This K. T. 
Yoga means any of the following Yogas: 
Sambandha between, 
(i) lords of the first and fifth 
(ii) lords of the first and ninth 
(iii) lords of the fourth and fifth 
(iv) lords of the fourth and ninth 
(v) lords of the seventh and fifth 
(vi) lords of the seventh and ninth 
(vii) lords of the tenth and fifth 
(viii) lords of the tenth and ninth 
For certain purposes the first house is considered as a Trikona 
also, but the convention is not to call the Sambandha between (i) 
lords of the first and fourth, (ii) lords of the first and seventh, 
(iii) lords of the first and tenth a K. T. Yoga, although a 
Sambandha between (i) lords of the first, and fourth, and (ii) the 
first and tenth is considered a Raja Yoga—a very good Yoga. 
For understanding the full meaning of Sambandha refer to 
Chapter 10. 
217 
The K.T. Yoga is really efficacious in full measure when the 
lord of an angle has Sambandha with the lord of a trine, but does 
not have Sambandha with the lord of the third, sixth, eighth or 
the eleventh house, but where the lord of a trine is also the lord 
of these houses (3rd, 6th, 8th, 1 1 th), the full efficacy of the 
K.T. Yoga is marred; the power to do good is lessened, but not 
completely wiped out. Even among the angles, the strength of 
the fourlords of angles is in the following proportions : 
Lord of the first 1 unit 
Lord of the fourth 2 units 
Lord of the seventh 3 units 
Lord of the tenth 4 units 
Thus the lord of the fourth is stronger than the lord of the 
first, and the lord of seventh stronger than the lord of the fourth, 
and the lord of the tenth is the strongest of them all. 
As stated earlier, the lords of the first (the first is both a 
Kendra and a Trikona), the fifth and the ninth are lords of 
Trikonas. They are powerful for the good in the following order: 
Lord of first 1 unit 
Lord of fifth 2 units 
Lord of ninth 4 units 
The strength of the lords of the third, sixth, eleventh and the 
eighth houses, in regard to their Papa qualities has been stated 
in Chapter 6 under Papi' to which please refer. Also refer to 
Maraka'in Chapter 10. 
To ascertain the efficacy of the K.T. Yoga, proceed in the 
following manner. The units of lords of trines and angles to do 
good is positive, additive or plus. The units of lords of 3, 6, 11 
and 8 to do evil is represented as negative, subtractive or minus 
Now we shall work out some examples to demonstrate how 
the resultant is arrived at after making due allowance for the 
lordship of good and evil houses. 
Example 1: Sambandha between lords of the first, fifth and 
third 
Lord of first 1 
Lord of fifth 2 
Lord of third —1 
Net 2 Go-1 
218 
Example 2: Sambandha of lord of the seventh, ninth and 
eighth 
Lord of seventh 2 
Lord of ninth 4 
Lord of eighth —6 
Net 0 
Example 3: Sambandha between lords of the ninth, tenth and 
eleventh 
Lord of ninth 4 
Lord of tenth 4 
Lord of eleventh —3 
Net 5 Good 
Example 4: Sambandha between lords of the fourth, ninth, 
sixth and eighth 
Lord of fourth 2 
Lord of ninth 4 
Lords of sixth —2 
Lord of eighth —6 
Nt —2 Evil 
In all these K. T. Yogar, at least one planet should be lord 
of a Trikona, i.e., lord of the fifth or the ninth and at least one 
pranet, the lord of the first, fourth, seventh or the tenth. It 
follows that if the lord of an angle has Sambandha with both the 
lord of the fifth and the ninth it will be very powerful to do good, 
and particularly so if the Sambandha is unsullied by Sambandha 
of any planet who is lord to 3, 6, 8 or 11. 
Example 5: Lords of the fifth, ninth and tenth 
Lord of fifth 2 
Lord of ninth 4 
Lord of tenth 4 
No other Sambandha -0 
Net 10 Very Good 
219 
K. T. Yoga however differs in strength according to the strength 
of the planets constituting the Yoga and the house they occupy. 
For example, for Sagittarius, Sun and Mercury together in the 
tenth will be very powerful because the lord of the tenth would 
be in a good house (tenth), in an angle (tenth) and Mercury would 
be exalted in Virgo. The same K. T. Yoga can be formed by 
Mercury and the Sun tenanting either the eighth or the twelfth 
house or even the eleventh house where the Sun would be debili- 
tated. Thus the effects differ according as the planets are strong 
or weak in a good house or evil houses. 
CHAPTER 
JUDGMENT OF THE TWELVE HOUSES 
SOME- general principles for judgment of each house have been 
given in Chapter 10. They should be applied to each of the 
twelve houses. We shall not repeat them here or when we take 
up each of the houses one after the other. 
Judgment of each house can be divided into four parts : (i) the 
house, the planets posited therein, and the aspects which the 
house and the planets therein receive from other planets; (ii) the 
position of the lord of the house in sign and the house and the 
aspects such lord receives from other planets, or his conjunction 
with other planets; (iii) the Karaka or the significator, his posi- 
tion by sign and house and the aspects he receives from other 
planets or his conjunction with other planets; (iv) good or bad 
Yogas affecting a house, as given in Chapter 11. 
For example, from the second house we judge accumulated 
wealth; from the fourth immovable property and happiness; 
from the eighth legacy; from the ninth prosperity and fortune, 
and from the eleventh income. Even eliminating the eighth for ' 
fudging finances, we have to take stock of the cumulative effects 
of the second, fourth, ninth and the eleventh. If one of the houses 
does not promise good results, but the other houses are fairly 
good and there are Yogas for wealth, even the house which does not 
hold out bright results may not fare so badly. This is what we imply 
by other Yogas or prospects in the rest of the chart. The following 
points have to be reiterated even at the cost of repetition : 
221 
(i) In Yogas where there is reference to aspect, only the full 
aspect should be considered. But in the matter of judgment of 
each house, the quarter aspect, the half aspect, the three-quarter 
aspect, and the full aspect, are all effective in an increasing order, 
i.e., the 50% aspect is more powerful than the 25% aspect, and 
the 75% aspect is more powerful than the 50% aspect; the 100% 
or full aspect is the most powerful of them all. 
(ii) Conjunction, according to old masters of Hindu astrology, 
occurs when two planets are in the same sign, irrespective of 
the distance between them or whether they are applying or 
separating. The orb of aspects and whether they are applying or 
separating are alien to Hindu astrology. These principles origi- 
nated in the Middle-East and the West, but are not found in the 
older Hindu texts. So, if a planet A is, say, in the 1st degree of 
Aries and a planet B is in the 29th degree of Aries, still they 
are treated as being in conjunction, provided both are in the 
same sidereal sign. Suppose two planets are in the same tropical 
sign, but after deducting the precession of the equinoxes and nuta- 
tion from the tropical longitudes, if the sidereal longitudes fall 
into two different sidereal signs, there will be no conjunction. We 
shall illustrate this by a concrete example. Suppose Mars occupies 
the 29th degree in the tropical Aries and the Moon occupies T; 
also in tropical Aries, and suppose the precession of the equinoxes 
is 23°, then deducting 23° from the tropical longitudes of Mars 
and Moon, the longitude of Mars will be 6° in Aries and of the 
Moon 8° in Pisces in the sidereal zodiac. Since one falls in 
sidereal Aries, and the other in sidereal Pisces, Mars and Moon 
will not be treated as being in conjunction, but as in the second 
and the twelfth from each other. 
(iii) The third point which we want to reiterate is that the 
houses should be counted from sign to sign. For example, if Leo 
is rising, Pisces would be the eighth sign and any planet in 
Pisces occupying any degree therein, should be treated as in the 
eighth house. 
After emphasising these points, it is now necessary to deal with 
each house individually. 
First House 
Judge the house, house lord and the Karaka—Sun. Then take 
the following into consideration. 
222 
If the lord of the first house is conjoined with a malefic (Sun, 
Mars, Saturn or Rahu or Ketu) and occupies the sixth, eighth or 
twelfth house, he impairs health. If the lord of the first is himself 
a malefic and occupies the above position, even then the health 
is not so good. But (a) for Scorpio ascendant Mars is the lord 
of the first and the sixth and if he is in Aries in sixth, or (b) for 
Aries, Mars is the lord of the first and the eighth and if he is 
in Scorpio in the eighth, or (c) for Aquarius ascendant, Saturn is 
the lord of the first and the twelfth and if he is in Capricorn, it 
is not so evil. If in the above cases (a), (b) and (c), the lord of 
the ascendant (owning 6th, 8th or 12th respectively) is in the 
ascendant, it is not bad for health. 
If the lord of the ascendant is in an angle or trine, it is good 
for bodily happiness and particularly so if aspected by benefics. 
If there is Papa (malefic) in the ascendant and the lord of the 
first is weak, the native suffers from diseases and mental 
anxieties. The native is under constant dread or apprehension and 
there is nervous tension. But if the.Lord of the ascendant is him- 
self a Papa and occupies the first house, it does not cause the 
ill-effects stated above. 
If the lord of the first is in the sixth, the native has constant 
worries and suffers mental distress due to them. If the lord of the 
first is posited in a sign owned by a Papa, the native is not so 
intelligent. This does not apply if the lord of the ascendant is in 
his own sign. 
If the Sun and the Moon are hemmed in by malefics, the 
native's actions are not good but rather evil. He is malevolently 
inclined. If Mars is in the seventh from the Sun, the Moon or 
the lord of the ascendant, the native is attached to other peoples' 
wives. If Gemini or Virgo is rising and Mercury is in Aries, 
Taurus, Cancer, Sagittarius or Capricorn, the native has a weak 
body. 
If a malefic is in the first house, he generally causes hurt in the 
head. If he is posited in the first 15°, the hurt will he on the 
left side of the head; if in the latter 15° on the right side of the 
head. Mars in the ascendant gives a youthful appearance and 
even in old age the inative looks young. Saturn onthe..other hand 
will cause the native to appear older than his age. Mercury herein 
makes the native quick and nimble like a boy. Venus imparts 
allurement in appearance, and Jupiter makes one deep and wise. 
223 
The Moon herein makes one restless unless he travels about. 
For detailed effects of planets in the ascendant refer to Chapter 9. 
If there is a movable sign on the cusp of the first house, the 
native is fond of action, walking, moving about or travelling. If 
the lord of the ascendant is also in a movable sign, the above 
effects are reinforced. If there is a fixed sign on the cusp of the 
first house, the native's temperament in respect of walking, 
moving about or travelling is just the reverse of that described 
for a movable sign; more so particularly if the lord of the first 
is also in a fixed sign. If a common sign is rising, that is, it is the 
ascendant, and its lord is also in a common sign, mixed results 
will result as shown above. 
If the lord of the first occupies a good house and has Sambandha 
with a benefic planet, he lives in a good place; conversely, if the 
lord of the ascendant occupies an evil house or Dusthana and is 
conjoined with or has Sambandha with a malefic the reverse is 
the case. If Saturn, unless exalted or in own house, or Rahu has 
Sambandha with the first house or its lord, the native keeps com- 
pany with low people. If benefics have the above Sambandha, 
instead of Saturn or Rahu, the reverse is the case. Look to the 
quality and inherent nature and attributes of the various planets 
as given in Chapters 6, 8 and 9. The native's companions and 
environment will be according to the planets which tenant the 
first house or aspect it or conjoin the lord of the ascendant or 
aspect him. 
The health, bodily vigour, mental energy, daring, push, opti- 
mism, capacity — all such qualities will be according to the 
strength or weakness of the first house and its lord. However, the 
actual temperament will also depend upon the nature of the planet 
owning the first or occupying the - house. A benefic in the above 
set-up would make the native good and kind. A malefic in the 
ascendant, would make him hard-hearted but industrious. 
Readers are referred to Chapter 4, which gives the general 
summing up according to the sign rising. If a long sign is on, the 
cusp of the first house and the lord of the first also occupies a 
long sign, the head would be large. If a short sign be ascending 
and the lord thereof be also in a short sign, the size of the "head 
would not be large.* The complexion will be modified according 
* This principle should be applied to ascertain all parts of the body. 
Each house governs a part of the body. 
224 
to the colour of the planet owning, occupying or aspecting the 
first house. 
Of all the houses, the ascendant is the most important. The 
natives who have a strong first house and a strong lord thereof 
are generally successful in life. 
If the lord of the ascendant is not combust and is in his own 
sign or exalted and occupies an angle or trine and if a benefic 
is posited in the ascendant and the lord of the eighth is in a house 
other than an angle, the native is long lived, wealthy and main- 
tains good health. 
Second House 
Judge from the second house, the planets tenanting or aspect- 
ing it, from the lord of the second house his location and planets 
conjoining or aspecting him. and Karaka for the second house, 
viz., Jupiter. We judge the family, speech, eyes, and wealtn from 
this house. Benefics augment the good effects by location as well 
as by aspect; while a malefic, unless he be the lord of second, 
would do the reverse. Since Mercury is primarily the planet 
governing speech, due attention should be paid to him also. The 
second house governs the eyes and malefics herein or a combina- 
tion of the Sun and Moon herein or in the eighth house impairs 
the right eye. The left eye is judged from the twelfth house. The 
Sun and Moon together, the Sun and Venus together in the second 
or the eighth impair the eye-sight. Mars frequently gives granules 
in the eye or trouble from sore eyes, and also impairs the eye- 
sight. 
If the lord of the second and the twelfth are conjoined with or 
aspected by malefics and posited in Trik; then the eye-sight 
suffers. Similarly, if the lords of the second and twelfth are con- 
joined with Papas (malefics) there is eye trouble. We also judge 
speech from this house. If benefics tenant or aspect it, the speech 
would be sweet, but if malefics do so instead, the speech would 
be harsh. Mars gives anger in speech, while Ketu makes it abusive. 
Rahu imparts falsehood and slyness. Saturn does the same, the 
Sun herein may make the speech sound proud if the planet is 
strong; but if the Sun is weak, it will be arrogant. Mercury, Jupi- 
ter, Venus and Moon with good Pakshabala, would make it logi- 
cal, sweet, poetic and attractive respectively. These attributes of 
planets should also be applied according as one or the other 
225 
planet conjoins or aspects the lord of the second. 
Some astrological principles governing eloquence have been 
given under the fifth house also because that house governs educa- 
tion and learning. The second house governs the mouth and also 
food. Each planet governs a taste (of food). If Jupiter is in the 
second, the native would be fond of sweet dishes; if Venus is 
present there, he would like sour ones, and so on. Refer to 
Chapter 6 on planets to determine which kind of taste is govern- 
ed by each planet. 
If the lord of the second is conjoined with Mercury, Jupiter 
and Venus and posited in an angle or trine from the ascendant, 
it confers wealth; but if the lord of the second is conjoined with 
the above-named planets and occupies the sixth, eighth or the 
twelfth house, the native suffers in respect of wealth. 
The conjunction of the lords of the first and second or their 
mutual exchange of places—the lord of the first in the second and 
the lord of the second in the first, makes one earn money with 
little effort. 
Generally benefics augment the good effects of the house they 
tenant. But there is another rule also that the Karaka tenanting 
the house for which he is a Karaka is not good, except for Saturn 
in the eighth. If Jupiter is conjoined with another planet and 
is in the second, it is good; but if Jupiter alone occupies the 
second house, it does not let the native accumulate wealth; it 
also curtails family happiness. 
The Sun and Moon together in , the second are adverse for 
accumulation of wealth; also the native's speech is harsh; the 
Sun and Mercury together in the second produce the same effect. 
If a Moon weak in Pakshabala is in the second and fully 
aspected by Mercury, he causes loss of wealth; or if Mercury in 
the second is aspected by the Moon, the native is without wealth. 
Venus in the second confers wealth. 
If the Sun in the second is conjoined with a planet, say A, the 
native's wealth will remain in the custody of the native's relation 
as signified by A. We shall clarify this by two examples. Sup- 
pose Taurus is rising and the Sun and Mercury are in the second. 
Here Mercury will be the lord of the fifth also. The fifth signifies 
children. The question now arises as to whether the children will 
be sons or daughters. Since Mercury is not a male planet, he will 
not signify sons but daughters and so the native's wealth will 
226 
be in the custody of his daughter or daughters. 
Suppose the Sun and Jupiter are in Pisces in the second. When 
Pisces is in the second, Aquarius will be the ascendant. Jupiter 
will be the lord of the eleventh also. The eleventh signifies elder 
brother, also friends. So the native's wealth will be in the custody 
of his elder brother or friends. Why an elder brother and not an 
elder sister? Because Jupiter is a male planet. 
Rahu in the second causes disease of the mouth or teeth, the 
Moon means trouble for the eyes, Venus to eyes or ears, Mars 
to ears; Mercury or Jupiter in own sign or exalted makes one 
deliver learned discourses in the congress of scholars. If Rahu 
or Saturn are conjoined with a female planet in the second, the 
native loses money through undesirable women. 
Third House 
If the lord of the third and Mars are in the sixth, eighth or 
the twelfth house (not necessarily together), there is no happiness 
in relation to younger brothers. If the lord of the eleventh and 
Jupiter are in the abovementioned houses, there is no happiness 
in respect of the elder brothers. 
If the lord of the third, conjoined with a benefic, is in the third 
house there is happiness from younger brothers. If the lord of 
the ascendant, conjoined with a benefic, is in the eleventh, there 
will be happiness from elder brothers. If Mars alone is in the 
third or if Jupiter alone is in the eleventh, there is no happiness 
from younger and elder brothers respectively. 
If Saturn in the third is aspected by Mars, there is loss of 
brothers; but if aspected by Jupiter or Venus, the house yields 
good results in respect of brothers. Jupiter in Sagittarius or Pisces 
in the third is good for brothers. Saturn herein increases the 
native's fortune and prosperity. But if Saturn and Rahu are to- 
gether in the third, there may be hurt from wood, in the right 
arm or pain due to Vata (wind). If the Sun and Mars together 
are in the third, there may be fracture of the right arm. If the 
Sun is in Leo in the ninth, there is loss of brothers; if a brother 
survives, he will attain a very high position in life. The Moon 
in the third, fully aspected by Papa, leads to loss of brothers. 
Mars in the third causes loss of younger brothers; the Sun herein 
causes loss of elder brothers. Saturn and Rahu together in the 
third cause loss of younger as well as elder brothers. 
227 
Mars in the third house, aspected by a malefic, causes hurt in 
the arm from a weapon. If Saturn is in the seventh, Rahu in the 
ninth and Mars in the eleventh, there is loss of brothers. Saturn 
in the third also causes loss of brothers. Mercury, Jupiter or 
Venus (one or more of them) in the third, is good in respect of 
brothers. 
In the above, where the word brother or brothers has been 
used, sister should be included. A female planet in the third 
gives more sisters, a male planet more brothers. Aspects of male 
or female planets on the third house should also be taken into 
account. 
Fourth House 
Apply the general principles regarding planets in the fourth 
house and the sign therein and those enunciated in Chapter 10. If 
the lord of the first and the fourth are conjoined together in the 
fourth, there is sudden gain of immovable property. If the lord 
conjoined with Mercury, Jupiter, Venus or lord of the fifth or the 
ninth, is in the fourth, it is an exceptionally good combination for 
acquisition of immovable properties and conveyances. If the 
lord of the fourth has Sambandha with Jupiter and the lords of 
the first and the ninth and is posited in the ascendant, it is a very 
good Yoga for position. The native is much honoured by the 
government. 
If the lord of the fourth is conjoined with the lord of the fifth 
or the ninth and is posited in the eleventh, it is a very good Yoga 
for acquisition of conveyances. Or if the lord of the fourth con- 
joined with the lord of the fifth or the ninth fully aspects the 
fourth, then also it is a good Yoga for conveyances. If the lord 
of the fourth is in the fourth, the native has a good house to 
live in and has good friends. Malefics in the fourth house, unless 
he be the lord of the first or the fourth, impair happiness in 
respect of the fourth house affairs. Saturn herein gives immovable 
property after thirty-five years of age; but the property acquired 
will not be new. This will however be so if Saturn is the lord of 
good houses. Malefics, whether in the fourth, eighth or the twelfth 
house, lead to annihilation of comforts in respect of conveyances. 
The Karaka for mother is the Moon. AH about the mother ~ 
happiness or otherwise — should be ascertained from the Moon, 
the fourth house and its lord and also from the fourth house as 
228 
counted from the sign tenanted by the Moon. 
The Sun and Mars in the fourth cause trouble in the region 
of the chest, due to imbalance of Pitta (bile). The fourth house 
governs the whole of the chest and the heart also. Malefics herein 
would cause diseases in the region and particularly so if they 
are lord of evil houses. If the lord of the fourth is weak or ill- 
placed by sign and house and if malefics tenant or aspect the 
fourth house, the native will not feel happy. 
If the native belongs to a class or community owning agricultural 
lands, the kind of land should be determined from the nature 
of the sign on the cusp of the fourth house and the planet or 
planets tenanting or aspecting the house. 
Fifth House 
If the lord of the fifth house from the ascendant and the lord 
of the fifth counted from the sign tenanted by the Moon, along 
with Mercury, Jupiter and Venus, are in Trik, the native does not 
receive higher education. On the other hand, if the lord of the 
fifth from the ascendant and frpm the Moon and Mercury, Jupiter 
and Venus are in angles, trines or the eleventh house, the 
native is highly educated and learned. If some of the good 
features enumerated above are present along with some adverse 
placements, the native has moderately good education. 
If the lord of the fifth, as counted from the radical* 
Mercury is well-placed + the native's logical and reasoning 
power is well developed; if the lord of the fifth as counted from 
the radical Jupiter is well-placed, the native has a good 
memory; if the lord of the fifth as counted from Venus is well 
placed in angles or trines, conjoined with a benefit, the native has 
good understanding of texts and good grasping power. If the 
lords of the fifth as counted from the ascendant and the Moon 
are combust, or in the initial five degrees or the last five degrees 
of a sign, then the intellect is not sharp. So will also be the case if 
the combinations stated above are present in respect of Mercury, 
Jupiter and Venus. 
The fifth house is studied for education and learning; the second 
house determines speech. But the two are inter-related. If the 
♦Radical means the sign occupied by a planet in the radix, i.e., nativity 
or birthchart. 
t Well-placed means well placed by sign and house and conjoined with 
or receiving aspect of benefits. 
229 
lord of the second and the fifth and Jupiter are not well-placed 
and are in the sixth, eighth or the twelfth house, or they have 
Sambandha with the lord of the eighth, then the power of speech 
is not good. Mercury also represents power of speech and if he is 
well-placed and has Sambandha with benefits, speech will be good. 
The reverse will be the case if this planet is weak, ill-placed and 
has Sambandha with Papas. 
If the second house tenants Papas, eloquence is impaired. 
Saturn in the second house is a great handicap for public speech. 
If Virgo is the sign ascending or if the Moon or the Sun occupy 
the sign, the native is a very good drawing-room conversationa- 
list, but is shy in the matter of public speaking. 
Children are judged from the fifth house and Jupiter. In addi- 
ton to the general principles stated in Chapter 10, the birth chart 
should be screened to find out if any of the following Yogas, 
which curtail the prospects of the birth of children or their living 
to a mature age, are present. 
(i) The lords of the ascendant, the fifth and the ninth and the 
lord of the fifth from Jupiter, if in Trik. 
(ii) Papas in the fifth and the eleventh or in either of these two 
houses. 
(iii) Malefics in the third. 
(iv) The Sun and Mercury both together in the first, second, 
fifth, tenth or the eleventh house. 
(v) Malefics in the fifth from the radical Moon and Jupiter. 
(vi) Pap arm the first, fourth, fifth, eighth, ninth, eleventh and 
the twelfth. The larger the number of houses tenanted by Papas, 
the greater the impediment to happiness in respect of children. 
(vii) Papas, the Moon and Jupiter in the fourth and the eighth. 
(viii) Rahu not conjoined with any planet, in the tenth. 
(ix) Papa in the fourth, Venus in the seventh and the Moon 
in the tenth. 
(x) Papas in the ninth, Venus in the seventh and the Moon in 
tenth. 
(xi)The Moon and Jupiter in the ascendant and Saturn in the 
seventh. 
(xii) Venus and Saturn in the seventh. 
(xiii) The Sun in the ascendant, and Saturn in the seventh. 
(xiv) The Sun and Saturn in the seventh, and the Moon in the 
230 
tenth. 
(xv) The lord of the sixth conjoined with the Sun and Saturn in 
the sixth and the Moon in the seventh. 
(xvi) Mars in\ the fifth or the eleventh particularly destroys 
children. If Mars in the fifth is in his own sign or Mars is the lord 
of the ascendant, he does not destroy. 
(xvii) The Sun in the eleventh or the fifth destroys the eldest 
child or eldest son. But the Sun in Leo does not do so. 
(xviii) Yogas which involve ill health or premature death of 
wife or husband also impair longevity of children. 
(xix) If Papas are in the ascendant, the seventh or the twelfth 
and a weak Moon (in Pakshabala) in the fifth, this combination 
destroys children. 
(xx) Mars and Saturn in a watery sign in the sixth. 
(xxi) Saturn in the fifth, Venus in the seventh. 
(xxii) The lord of the seventh conjoined with a Papa 'm the fifth. 
(xxiii) Rahu in Virgo in the ascendant. 
(xxiv) Sagittarius or Pisces on the cusp of the fifth house and 
the fifth not aspected by Mars or Jupiter. 
(xxv) Jupiter not conjoined with any planet in the fifth or the 
seventh. 
Papas in the fifth house destroy children after birth; but if 
aspected by Jupiter, subsequent children will survive. If Rahu 
or Ketu is in Aries, Taurus or Cancer in the fifth, they do not 
obstruct children. Saturn in Aquarius in the fifth gives five sons; 
Saturn in Capricorn in the fifth three daughters. 
Saturn in Taurus or Gemini in the fifth gives one son. The 
lord of the fifth in an odd sign gives more sons, but in an even 
sign more daughters. The female planets in the fifth give more 
daughters; male planets more sons. 
We shall examine the fifth house from one more point of view 
and conclude with discussion pertaining to this house. The fifth 
governs the stomach. Malefics herein impair the digestive power. 
The Sun gives pain in the stomach; Mars may give peptic ulcers; 
Saturn, Rahu and Ketu may impair digestion due to wind, gas, 
etc. The aspects of malefics act similarly. 
Sixth Houre 
Apply the general principles to this house. But it is not good 
to have the lord of the sixth stronger than the lord of the first. 
231 
The first house represents the self and the .sixth represents the 
enemy. If, therefore the lord of the first is stronger than the 
sixth, the native would overpower his opponents and enemies, 
but if the converse be the case, the native's opponents and enemies 
will vanquish him. Similarly, the first is the body and the sixth 
governs diseases and so quite naturally if the sixth is stronger, 
the factors of illness and ill-health will overpower the body; 
but if the first house' and its lord are stronger, the native would 
overcome the adverse factors of health. 
If the lord of the sixth is conjoined with a malefic and is 
posited in the ascendant or the eighth, it causes a wound. If it 
be the Sun, he causes an ailment or wound in the head; the Moon 
in the mouth, Mars in the neck or throat, Mercury in the region 
of the heart, Jupiter in or near the navel, Venus in the eye, and 
Saturn or Rahu or Ketu in the legs, feet or lips. 
If the lord of the ascendant is in Aries, Gemini, Virgo or Scorpio 
or in any other sign, if he is aspected by Mars and Mercury, there 
is some defect in the eye. 
If the lord of the sixth is in the ascendant sixth, seventh or 
the eighth, he causes destruction of enemies, If the lord of the 
sixth is in the fifth or the ninth, the son of the native is anta- 
gonistic to him. If the lord of the sixth is in the second or the 
twelfth, the native is very malevolent. If the lord of the sixth 
is in the third or the eleventh, the native is strong and puts others 
to distress. If the lord of the sixth is in the fourth or the tenth, 
there is some ailment in the region of the navel, or the lower part 
of the stomach. 
The lord of the first or the eighth in the sixth causes trouble 
in the left eye, Venus and Saturn together in the sixth cause 
ailments in the left eye, leg or foot. If the lord of the ascendant 
is in Aries, Gemini, Virgo or Scorpio in the sixth, the native does 
not enjoy good health and is sickly. Even if he is in the above 
signs in any other house, if he is aspected by his enemy, the native 
has poor health. 
Rahu or Ketu in the sixth or the eighth cause trouble in the 
teeth. If the Moon, conjoined with a Papa, is in the sixth, he 
causes sickness or physical ailments. The Moon conjoined with 
a malefic in the ascendant also makes the native sickly. If the 
lord of the ascendant is conjoined with a Papa, the native does 
not keep good health. Similarly, if the Moon in any sign of 
232 
house is conjoined with a Papa, the native does not keep good 
health. If Papas are in angles and are not aspected by benefics, 
the same result is to be expected. If the lord of the sixth is con- 
joined with the Sun or Rahu and tenants the twelfth house, the 
native lives in another man's house at the latter's cost and resorts 
to low acts. If the lord of the first or the eighth, Venus or Saturn 
occupy the sixth house, the native suffers from wounds or ailments 
during their Dasha (periods). If the lord of the eighth is in the 
eighth conjoined with a Papa, the native's acts are of a low 
order. 
The Sun or Moon together or the Sun and Venus together or 
the Moon and Venus together or Mars and Saturn together in the 
sixth cause trouble in the left eye. 
Seventh House 
Apply the general principles to the seventh house, the lord 
of the seventh and to Venus who is significator for wife. In female 
horoscope, Jupiter should also be considered as significator for 
husband. Since Venus represents all kinds of sensuous pleasures, 
such as good food, good clothes, a good house, comforts, convey- 
ances, etc., and as the pleasures of sex are included as an integral 
part of enjoyment, Venus in male nativities is considered the signi- 
ficator for wife. But Venus being a female planet, his counterpart 
Jupiter is taken by one school of Hindu astrologers as the signi- 
ficator for husband. We recommend that Jupiter as well as Venus 
be taken into account in female charts. 
If the house tenants its lord or a benefic and is aspected by 
benefics and if the lord of the seventh does not occupy the sixth, 
eighth or the twelfth house from the ascendant and is not conjoin- 
ed with a malefic, and if Venus is also in a good house and neither 
conjoined with a malefic nor aspected by a malefic, prospects for 
matrimonial life and conjugal happiness are good. If the planetary 
position is otherwise, the reverse is the case. If some good features 
are present and others are unfavourable, there would be neither 
conjugal bliss nor complete happiness. 
The appearance and temperament of the wife will be according 
to the lord of the seventh and if there is a planet in the seventh, 
according to his traits. This has also to be judged from the seventh 
from the radical Moon. 
The state of married happiness and the longevity of the 
233 
marriage partner also depend upon the following two factors : 
(i) The Nakshatra (constellation) in which the native has his 
radical Moon and the Nakshatra tenanted by the Moon of the 
marriage partner. 
A Table or chart is generally given as an Appendix in the 
Hindu Panchangas (Ephemerides), which gives the harmonious 
points between two birth charts, depending upon the location of 
the Moon in the husband's chart as well as the longitude of Moon 
in the wife's chart. The maximum number of harmonious points 
is 36. If on the basis of the two longitudes of Moon in the two 
charts, the harmonious points are 18, the two charts are considered 
as being in agreement. The greater the number of harmonious 
points the greater the harmony. If the number of harmonious 
points is less than 18, the pandits do not declare that the pair 
should be matched, because there would be no harmony between 
the couple. The smaller the number of harmonious points the 
lesser the conjugal happiness. 
(ii) Mars, Saturn, Rahu, Ketu and the Sun are the five malefics 
which should not be (a) in the first or the seventh or the eighth, 
(b) in the second, or the fourth or the twelfth. 
The position in group (a) of houses is worse than in group (b). 
Even among the five planets named above, as regards malignancy 
they are not rated equally. 
In regard to matrimonial happiness and longevity of the marriage 
partner, Mars is considered the worst — the most baneful. Then 
comes Saturn a close second. Then Rahu and Ketu and then the 
Sun. 
As regards the Sun in the seventh from the ascendant, unless 
he be in his sign Leo, in a female nativity he leads to a separation. 
Whether the separation will be temporary or permanent can 
however be determined by examining the over-all picture, and 
the strength or weakness of the seventh house and its lord from 
the ascendant as well as from the Moon. But barring location in 
the seventh, the Sun is not considered so baneful for matrimonial 
happiness in the first, second, fourth, eighth or the twelfth house. 
As regards each of the five planets (malefics) stated above, the 
malignancy decreases in the following order : 
(i) In debilitation 
(ii) In great enemy's house 
234 
(iii) In enemy's house 
(iv) In neutral's house 
(v) In friend's house 
(vi) In great friend's house 
(vii) In own house 
(viii) In exaltation 
Let us illustrate this; suppose Mars is in his great enemy's 
house. This will be very evil. But Mars in his own house in the 
first will not be so bad. The same applies to Saturn, Rahu, Ketu 
and the Sun. 
Just as we examine (a) the first, seventh and eighth houses, or 
(b) the second, fourth or twelfth houses from the ascendant or the 
rising sign, so also we have to examine from the radical Moon; 
Malefics in (a) first, seventh and eighth or"(b) second, fourth or 
twelfth from him also damage matrimonial happiness. 
Similarly, the above houses from the radical Venus, if tenanted 
by one or more of the five malefics, will be harmful for conjugal 
happiness and damage matrimonial life. Since we have enumerated 
six houses out of twelve whore malefics are harmful and we have 
advised counting of these houses not only from the radical ascen- 
dant but from the natal Moon and natal Venus also, a doubt will 
arise that there are bound to be one or more houses (from the 
ascendant, Moon or Venus), tenanted by malefics. Then, is the 
matrimonial happiness sure to be damaged? The reply is 'No.' 
Malefics in the above places in one birth chart (husbands' or 
wife's) act as an antidote to the evil effects (if there are malefics in 
any of the above places) in the other nativity. For example, 
suppose there is Mars in the seventh in the male chart and Mars 
in the ascendant in the female chart. No more will Mars thwart 
married happiness in either chart. These influences are referred 
to in Hindu astrology as Mangalika. The world literally means 
pertaining to Mars; but Mars being the commander-in-chief 
of malefics for matrimonial purposes, includes in its connotation 
Saturn, Rahu, Ketu and Sun also. And so the collective term goes 
under the nomenclature of Mangalika. 
In order to assess whether there is a complete balancing of 
malefic influences in one chart by the malefics in the other, all 
the houses where malefics act evilly have to be tabulated and 
then compared. 
235 
Apart from these, suppose the man or the girl is unmarried or 
if „married the birth chart of the partner is not available, then 
how is matrimonial happiness to be astrologically judged. When 
only one party's chart is available the following rules should be 
followed: 
Influences which Mar. Matrimonial Happinesr 
(i) Malefics in second and seventh. 
(ii) The lord of the second or seventh house conjoined with a 
malefic. 
(iii) (a) Venus conjoined with a Papa;(b) Venus hemmed in 
between Papas; (c) Papasm the fourth or eighth from Venus. 
(iv) Malefics in the first, fourth, seventh, eighth or the twelfth 
from the ascendant. 
(v) The lord of the seventh in the eighth or the lord of the 
eighth in the seventh, or the lord of the sixth in the seventh or 
the lord of the seventh in the sixth. 
(vi) (a) Jupiter alone in the seventh, or (b) Jupiter conjoined 
with a Papa'm the seventh. 
(vii) Influences which have been described under the fifth house, 
curtailing longevity of children also act as impediments to matri- 
monial happiness. 
(viii) The lord of the seventh in the fifth. 
(ix) The lord of the fifth in the seventh. 
(x) The Sun and Rahu together in the seventh means loss of 
wealth through women. 
(xi) Venus in Scorpio in the seventh. 
((xii) Mercury in Taurus in the seventh. 
(xiii) Jupiter in Capricorn in the seventh. 
(xiv) Saturn in Pisces in the seventh; particularly so, if the Sun 
is also in Virgo in the ascendant. 
(xv) The lord of the seventh combust or hemmed in by male- 
fics or debilitated or conjoined with Papas. 
(xvi) Venus and Moon in opposition to Mars and Saturn. 
(xvii) Ketu in the seventh gives a sickly wife. 
If any of the above are present, matrimonial happiness would 
be curtailed in any of the following manners : 
(1) Delayed marriage. 
(2) Incompatibility of temperament. 
236 
(3) Separation due to inability to pull on together or one living 
away from his wife due to economic or other reasons. 
(4) ill-health of the partner. 
(5) Premature demise of the partner. 
Eighth House, 
From the eighth house we judge longevity. For judgment of 
longevity, the span of life has been divided into three sectors : ( 
i) upto the age of 36 years; (ii) from the 37th to the 72nd year; ( 
iii) from the 73rd to the 108th year or beyond. These three sec- 
tors are referred to in Hindu astrology as (i) short life, (ii) medium 
life, and (iii) long life. 
Whenever the Mahadasha or Antardasha (how to calculate the 
Mahadasha and Antardasha and when it will be operative has 
been explained in a subsequent chapter) of a Maraka planet is 
operative, there is danger to the life of the native. If by calcula- 
tions which we shall explain below, the native is assigned a 
short life, the relevant period has to be looked up during the 
sector of age upto 36 years. If he is assigned medium life, we 
look up to the fatal period (Dasha) and sub-period (Antardasha) 
during the age of 37 to 72. If the calculations show that he has 
long life, we look to such periods beyond the age of 72. 
For judging short, medium or long life we base our calculations 
on the following data : 
(i) Location of the lord of the ascendant. 
(ii) Location of the lord of the eighth house. 
(iii) The sign occupied by Saturn. 
(iv) The sign occupied by the Moon. 
(v) The sign rising (ascendant). 
(vi) Hora-lagna. 
Readers are familiar with (i) to (v) above but ingredient (vi) 
will be new to them. So we shall first explain how to calculate it. 
The word Lagna' means ascendant and the word 'flora' means 
hour. So the expression Hora-lagnameans hour-ascendant; but 
we shall refer to it as Hora-lagna because that is the technical 
word which occurs in all the old texts on the subject. It is cal- 
culated as shown below. 
The longitude of the Sun at sunrise and one sign for each hour 
237 
since sunrise, give the longitude of Hora-lagna. 
Example : To find the Hora-lagna for 4 P.M. I.S.T. (time of 
birth) on 2nd October 1969 at Delhi. Look up the Ephemeris and 
find sunrise at Delhi on 2nd October. 
The sunrise at Delhi was at 6-14 A.M. (Indian Standard Time). 
On looking up the Ephemeris and calculating the longitude of 
the Sun at sunrise, we find that it was 5-15-12-58. 
The hours elapsed from sunrise to 4 P.M. will be: 
16- 0 hours (4 P.M.) 
deduct 6-14 
9-46 
Nine completed hours come to 9 signs and since 1 hour is 
equal to 1 sign or 30° and 46' = 23"; so 9 hours 46 minutes equal 
to 9 signs 23 degrees. 
S. D. M. S. 
5 15 12 58 
Add the two 9 23 0 0 
Deduct if the 15 8 12 58 
Sum exceeds 12 12 0 0 0 
3 8 12 58 
So the Hora-lagnais 8° 12' 58" in Cancer. 
Having explained the calculation of Hora-lagna, we give the 
principles of judging whether the life would be short, medium or 
long. Three sets of principles are given below. If the same infer- 
ence is derived from any of the two seexpression—movable, 
epted as the resultant inference. 
Readers will in the following lines come across the expres- 
sion—movable, fixed and common signs. They have been spe- 
cified in Chapter 5 dealing with signs. The same are given below 
for easy reference. 
(1) Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn are movable. 
(2) Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius are fixed. 
(3) Gemini, Virgo, Sagattarius and Pisces are common 
A. (i) If the lord of the first is in a movable sign and the 
lord of the eighth also in a movable sign or one of them in fixed 
and the other in common sign: long life. 
238 
(ii) If the lord of the first is in a common sign and the lord 
of the eighth also in a common sign or one of them in a 
movable and the other in a fixed sign : medium life. 
(iii) If the lord of the first is in a fixed sign and the lord 
of the eighth also in a fixed sign or one of them in a movable 
sign and the other in a common sign : short life. 
B. Look to the sign tenanted by Saturn and the sign tenanted 
by Moon. 
(i) If both are in movable signs or one in a fixed and the other 
in a common sign : long life. 
(ii) If both are in common signs or one in a movable and the ot 
her in a fixed sign : medium life. 
viii) If both are in fixed signs or one in a movable and the other 
in a common sign : short life. 
Note: If the Moon occupies the ascendant or the seventh house, 
instead of judging from Saturn and the Moon as described above, 
judge from the sign on the cusp of the ascendant, instead of the 
sign occupied by Saturn, and the sign tenanted by Moon. 
C. Look to the sign on the cusp of the ascendant and also the 
sign in which the Hora-lagna falls. How to calculate the Hora- 
lagna for a birth chart has been explained above. 
(i) If both of them fall in movable signs or one in a fixed and 
the other in a common sign : long life. 
(ii) If both of them occupy common signs or one in a fixed 
and the other in a movable sign : medium life. 
(iii) If both of them are in fixed signs or one in a movable and 
the other in a common sign: short life. 
The same inference arrived at by any two of the above (A), 
(B) and (C) is taken as the resultant inference. Suppose the three 
inferences are all different,, i.e., from one set we get long life, 
from the other medium life and from the third short „life, what 
should be done under such a circumstance? 
In such a case, the inference drawn from (C), that is, the 
Lagna (ascendant) and the Hora-lagna prevails. There is one more 
proviso to the general rule. If Jupiter occupies the first or the 
seventh house and if he is not aspected by malefics, then if the 
resultant inference denotes short life, it should be raised to me- 
dium life; if it denotes medium life, this should be raised to long 
life. 
Despite the above rules, it must be admitted that the determi- 
239 
nation of longevity is a very difficult matter for the Hindu texts 
state that the conclusion arrived at from these rules will be true 
only if the native leads a pious and moderate life. They add that 
gluttony, drinking, smoking, addiction to drugs—in short leading 
an intemperate life will curtail longevity. Similarly, vicious 
thoughts and malevolent inclinations harden the arteries and 
weaken the heart and the native dies earlier than expected. Hindu 
texts lay down specifically that envy and enmity weaken the 
heart, and that is perhaps the single largest factor for cardiac in- 
sufficiency or weakness. This has not been realised fully by our 
heart specialists, but this rule has been laid down by the ancients 
with their wise and watchful experience of humanity 
To revert to the astrological rules, we give below some more 
principles. Apply the general principles laid down in Chapter 10. 
The strength of the ascendant and the ascendant lord is the most 
important factor. To give good longevity, the lord of the ascen- 
dant should be stronger than the lord of the eighth and the latter 
should preferably not occupy an angle as counted from the 
ascendant. 
The location of Saturn in the eighth house confers longevity. 
The general rule is that a Karaka spoils the house if he tenants 
the house for which he is a Karaka. But there is an exception to 
this general rule for Saturn occupying the eighth house. Saturn is 
the Karaka for the eighth house, but his occupation of the eighth 
confers longevity. 
If benefics occupy the eighth, the native has an unhappy child- 
hood, but he is very couragerous and achieves success in very 
difficult projects. Jupiter in the eighth causes undiagnosed 
diseases. If the lord of the eighth is in the eleventh, the native 
leads a happy life in old age. 
If a Papa is lord of the eighth, it does not promise a very long 
span of life unless conjoined with a benefic. Similarly, the lord 
of the eighth, if conjoined with a Papa and occupying the sixth 
or the twelfth house from the ascendant curtails longevity; the 
native has thievish inclinations and is troubled by enemies. The 
lord of the eighth in the eighth augurs long life. So also the lord 
of the third in the third and the lord of the eighth in the third 
are considered good for longevity. 
From the eighth, we also judge legacy. If the lord of the eighth 
is strong and the house beneficially tenanted and aspected and 
240 
the lord of the eighth house is also aspected by benefics, the native 
may gain a legacy. The question of legacy has, however, to be 
judged against the family background and the circumstances, for 
a legacy presupposes affluent but old relations. 
Ninth House 
The ninth house primarily refers to fortune and prosperity, 
while the tenth to actions and position in life. The two are allied 
but if we have to make a distinction we would explain it as 
follows. 
A man may be rich and prosperous and may lead a comfort 
able life, but have no status in life. Let us take the example 
of a villager who migrates to a large town like Delhi or 
Bombay and sells Pan (betel-leaf) and earns a thousand or fifteen 
hundred rupees per month; or a villager owning fields, a granary and 
cattle. Their ninth house is strong. On the other hand let us take 
the example of a professor, earning only a few hundred rupees 
a month but hundreds of students bowing down to him every 
day. Or a newly appointed magistrate, with hardly enough of a 
salary to make two ends meet, but hundreds of people salaaming 
him. Their tenth house is strong. 
But though the above distinction can be made, it is the general 
practice to take the two houses, the ninth and the tenth, together 
because one determines vocation or self efforts and the other 
predicts prosperity. 
Judge the ninth house according to the general principles in 
relation to the house, its lord and the Karakas—the Sun and 
Jupiter for the ninth house. It is not good to have the lord of the 
ninth in the sixth, eighth or the twelfth. Nor is it desirable to 
have a lord of any of these houses in the ninth. 
From the ninth we judge religiousness and also benevolent or 
malevolent intentions of the native, since benevolence has been 
peached by all religions and malevolence graded as irreligious- 
ness. Mars, Saturn or Rahu in the ninth make one untruthful. 
These malefics also make one hard-hearted and malevolent. 
Jupiter, the Sun, the Moon, Mercury, Venus or Ketu incline 
one to much religiousness and dogmatic worship in the traditional 
orthodox manner. Mars, Saturn and Rahu — particularly the last 
two—make one a free thinker not bound by rituals. If only Saturn 
and Rahu are present without the aspects of benefics or Saturn 
241 
aspects the ninth, the native may not have much faith in religion. 
But Saturn or Rahu in the ninth fully aspected by a strong 
Jupiter, would make one philosophical with a mystic approach, 
caring more for the true religious spirit than for rituals. A strong 
Saturn tenanting or fully aspecting the ninth house develops an 
inner feeling of renunciation and we do not infrequently come 
across a strong Saturn in the ninth or aspecting it in the charts 
of ascetics. 
To revert to the material side of life, we can provide the follow- 
ing criteria for judgment of fortune and prosperity (ninth house) 
and rank and prosperity (tenth house). 
(i) If the lord of the ascendant has Sambandha with the lord 
of the ninth and the latter along with Jupiter tenants the ascen- 
dant, the native is greatly respected by the people and the 
government. Even if the lord of the ninth is in the ascendant and 
is fully aspected by Jupiter, the native is well respected. 
(ii) If the lords of the first, fourth and the ninth houses have 
Sambandha and the three lords aspects their houses, the native is 
fortunate and long-lived. 
(iii) The Sambandha between the lord of an angle and the lord 
of a trine is a contributory factor for good luck. For details refer 
to Kendra—Trikona Yogas in Chapter 11. 
(iv) The following are the great years for each planet: 
Sun 22, Moon 24, Mars 28, Mercury 32, Jupiter 16, Venus 25 
Saturn 36. Rahu 42 and Ketu 48. How to predict from these 
years is described below. 
Suppose a well-placed Sun is in the ninth house or the lord of 
the ninth house. Then the native's fortune would escalate when he 
completes 21 years of age and from his 22nd year onwards, he 
will rise in life. Suppose it is the Moon who is the lord of the 
ninth house and well placed in the chart or a strong Moon 
occupies the ninth. Then as the Moon's great year is 24, we 
predict escalation in fortune from the 24th year onwards. And 
so with other planets according to the year ear-marked for each. 
This principle is also applied in the case of other houses. Sup- 
pose for a Gemini ascendant lord of fifth, Venus is exalted in 
the tenth. Then we may predict in the 25th year the birth of a 
son (fifth house) or rise in position (tenth house) or sudden gain 
of money (fifth house) according to the background and circum- 
stances of the native. We have generally observed that if a strong 
A.-16 
242 
Saturn is lord of good houses and strong by sign and is in the 
fourth house, the native starts acquiring immovable properties 
after he completes 35 years of age and from the 36th year onwards. 
This is a rough and ready way of prediction without calculating 
the Dashas and Antardashas which we shall deal with in a sub- 
sequent chapter. 
In South India, the astrologers judge the father from the ninth 
house, but in northern India the judgment is made from the tenth. 
Tenth House 
The Karakas for the tenth house are four: Sun, Mercury, 
Jupiter and Saturn. This is the house of personal efforts, of action, 
achievements of success or otherwise, trade and commerce, rank 
and status in service, political power, the respect one commands 
and the position in life. For all these, we have to judge the tenth 
house, its lord and the Karakas. If the tenth lord is relegated to 
the third, sixth, eighth or the twelfth, it is generally an argument 
against the achievement of a very high rank in life. But if the 
lord of the tenth is Mars, from the third house he will fully aspect 
the tenth house (the aspect of Mars, on the eighth house from 
the one occupied by him is full) it is not bad. Similarly, if Saturn 
is the lord of the tenth and occupies the eighth house, he will 
fully aspect his own house—the tenth, because Saturn has full 
aspect on the third house as counted from the one occupied by 
him, and this is not so bad; for the general principle is that if the 
lord of a house fully aspects his house it is very good; whether 
the planet be a malefic or a benefic it is good for him, to occupy 
his own house or fully aspect it. 
(i) The lord of the first in the tenth is a strong argument for 
enhancing the general prestige of the native and giving him suc- 
cess in his projects. If the lord of the tenth also occupies the first, 
the prospects will be still better. 
(ii) Similarly, the lord of the tenth in the ninth or the lord of 
the ninth in the tenth is a very good argument for good luck and 
eminent position. If the lord of the ninth and the tenth are toge- 
ther in the ninth or the tenth, it is still better. Or if the lord of 
the tenth is in the ninth and the lord of the ninth in the tenth, 
the mutual exchange of houses is considered a good Raja Yoga. 
Or if both the lords combine in any house, in an angle or trine, 
it promotes prosperity and improves the position in life. 
243 , 
(iii) The placement of the lord of the fifth in the tenth or the 
lord of the tenth in the fifth is very good. If they mutually ex- 
change *places. it is still better. So also if both the lords are 
conjoined and together occupy any house, preferably an angle 
or trine; this is considered a very good Raja Yoga. 
We have referred to the conjunction or mutual exchange 
between (i) the lords of the ninth and the tenth, and (ii) the lords 
of the fifth and the tenth. In fact, any kind of Sambandha bet- 
ween the lord of an angle and that of a trine causes Raja Yoga ( 
see Kendra-Trikona Yogas at the end of Chapter 11). 
A large number of Yogas have been give, in Chapter 11. They 
should be screened to see if any of them are found in the birth 
chart under examination and the results predicted according to 
the effects given therein. Some other rules for judging the tenth 
house are given below. 
If a benefic planet occupies the tenth house and the lord of the 
latter is strong in his own house or his sign of exaltation in an 
angle or trine, the native occupies a high position and is long- 
lived. 
If the Sun or Mars occupies the tenth house and the lord of 
the tenth house is well placed, the native commands great res- 
pect and is daring and pushing. He is also popular. 
It may however be added that though the Sun and Mars in 
the tenth will escalate the native's own position, they would cur- 
tail the father's longevity and particularly so if they are aspected 
by or conjoined with malefics. Saturn in the tenth is not con- 
sidered bad in Hindu astrology, though according to some leading 
Western astrologers. Saturn in the tenth raises the native very 
high and then his career crashes to the ground. In Hindu astrology 
no such stigma or prejudice is attached to Saturn. On the other 
hand, the lord of the sixth, eighth or the twelfth in the tenth is 
considered a pulling down force for career and rise in life. The 
lord of the eighth in the tenth is considered particularly evil, 
both in regard to curtailing longevity of the father and in respect 
of the native's career. For judging longevity of the father, consi- 
der also whether the Sun is strong and well placed or otherwise 
because the Sun is Karaka for the father. 
Since the tenth house also governs trade and commerce and 
business activities and most businessmen carry on trade and 
commerce in partnership with one or more partners, due thought 
244 
should be bestowed to the seventh house and its lord also. The 
natives who have malefics in the seventh or whose seventh lord 
tenants the sixth, eighth or the twelfth house as counted from 
the ascendant should not carry on partnership business. Either the 
partner will let him down or the partnership will be broken or 
there will be a financial loss. 
The four Karakas for the tenth house—the Sun, Mercury, 
Jupiter and Saturn—each represents one or more features. The 
Sun represents the self and health. If the self is strong physically 
and mentally, the native will be vigorous in pushing ahead and 
mentally alert. Mercury governs speech, nimbleness activity, 
quick disposal, dealings with others, expression, correspondence, 
etc. Besides, it presides over nerves and a person has to be good 
in all these to achieve success in his efforts and be diplomatic 
in his dealings with others. Jupiter represents wealth and also 
wisdom. If our personal efforts are to result in an increasing bank 
balance, Jupiter has to be strong and well placed. Besides a 
shallow mind may emit a flitting light but cannot be a permanent 
source of illumination. It is the deep seated wisdom of Jupiter 
which is always necessary for arriving at sound judgment. And 
lastly, a good Saturn bestows the quality of patience and per- 
severance, hard work and laborious application to work. A rol- 
ling stone gathers no moss and a person who is impatient or does 
not have enough perseverance leaves the task in hand uncomp 
leted. As the wise proverb goes, success is one per cent inspira- 
tion and ninety-nine per cent perspiration. Saturn stands for hard 
and persistent application and those who lack in labour are 
unsuccessful. 
We have emphasised the role of Karakas so that the readers 
while judging the tenth house may not overlook them. We have 
seen even some good astrologers devoting time and attention 
exclusively to the tenth house and its lord and ignoring the 
Karakas altogether with the result that their judgments miscarry. 
One word more and we shall finish with the judgment of this 
house. Do not ignore the Moon. Look to the sign occupied by 
the Moon and the tenth house from it. 
A planet in the tenth from the ascendant or the Moon gives 
an indication of the type of work a man is destined to do. For 
the type of work 'governed by each planet, readers are referred 
to Chapters 6, 8 and 9. 
245 
Eleventh House 
The eleventh house is primarily the house of gain and income. 
This is the only house where all planets, whether benefics or 
malefics are considered good for they add to the native's income. 
But Papas here, while good for the native's own income cause 
ill-health or premature death of the father and the elder brother 
of the native; they are also adverse for children. 
Note the two houses, (i) the house or houses owned by the 
planet tenanting the eleventh, (ii) the house tenanted by the lord 
of the eleventh. The gain of money or acquisition will be governed 
by the matters and affairs of these two houses. For example, if 
the lord of the eleventh is in the fifth, there may be sudden gains 
through learning or authorship or from sons—all matters governed 
by the fifth house. Or take the example of the lord of the seventh 
in the eleventh when there may be gain through the wife or 
father-in-law, in partnership, business, etc. 
The income or money is one of the chief points of enquiry in 
every birth chart. The second is the house of accumulated money, 
the fourth of landed properties, the eighth of money or proper- 
ties received through legacy, the ninth of general good luck and 
fortune, the tenth of personal efforts and success in endeavours 
and the eleventh of income. In fact, we should look to all these 
houses, if we wish to arrive at a balanced judgment in regard 
to wealth and affluence of the native. We therefore provide below 
some general rules which will touch on one or more of these 
houses. 
The Sambandha between the lords of the following houses is 
good for wealth : (i) first and second, (2) first and fourth, (3) first 
and fifth, (4) first and ninth. (5) first and tenth, (6) first and 
eleventh, (7) second and fourth, (8) second and fifth, (9) second 
and ninth, (10) second and tenth, (11) second and eleventh, ( 
12) fourth and fifth, (13) fourth and ninth, (14) fourth and tenth, ( 
15) fourth and eleventh, (16) fifth and ninth, (17) fifth and tenth, ( 
18) fifth and eleventh, (19) ninth and tenth, (20) ninth and 
eleventh, (21) tenth and eleventh. This last Yoga is good for 
wealth but a pulling down force for rank and status. Some other 
planetary settings propitious for wealth are: 
(i) The lord of the second strong in the tenth, (ii) The lords of 
the fourth and the ninth together in second, (iii) The lord of the 
eleventh in the second and the lord of the second in the eleventh 
246 
or both strong in an angle from the ascendant. 
The good Yogas given in Chapter 11 should also be examined. 
Now, here are some combinations which cause poverty. It is only 
after examining the two sets of combinations for wealth and 
for poverty—that one should arrive at any inference. 
The Sambandha between the following lords causes poverty: 
(1) sixth and first, (2) sixth and second, (3) sixth and third. 
(4) sixth and fourth, (5) sixth and fifth. (6) sixth and seventh, 
(7) sixth and eighth, (8) sixth and ninth, (9) sixth and tenth, ( 
10) sixth and eleventh, (11) sixth and twelfth, (12) eighth and 
twelfth, (13) twelfth and first. (14) twelfth and second, (15) twelfth 
and third, (16) twelfth and fourth, (17) twelfth and fifth, (18) 
twelfth and seventh, (19) twelfth and ninth, (20) twelfth and tenth, ( 
21) twelfth and eleventh. 
Some other planetary combinations which cause poverty are 
given below: 
(1) If the lord of the first or the eighth be Jupiter and the lord 
of the ninth is weaker than Jupiter or combust and the lord of 
the eleventh is weak and does not tenant an angle from the 
ascendant. 
(2) Mars, Mercury, Jupiter or Saturn, if combust or debilitated 
in the fifth, sixth, eighth, eleventh or the twelfth. 
(3) If Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn occupy the 
fifth, sixth, eighth, tenth and the twelfth, in any order, and the 
lord of the twelfth is combust or debilitated and stronger than 
the lord of the first. 
(4) If Virgo or Capricorn be the rising sign and the Moon, 
Mars, Jupiter and Venus are debilitated and occupy any of the 
following houses: 1st, 5th, 7th, 9th, 10th and 1 1 th. 
(5) If a fixed sign is rising and Papas are in angles or trine and 
there is no benefic in an angle or trine. 
(6) If the birth is at night, the Moon very weak and the eighth 
from Moon is tenanted or aspected by Papas. 
(7) Rahu or Ketu conjoined with the Moon cause poverty. 
This is one factor; other factors must also be looked into. 
(8) Papas in the fourth from the ascendant or Moon cause 
poverty. 
(9) If the lord of the ascendant is weak and is aspected by the 
lord of eighth. 
(10) If the lord of the fourth is aspected by the lord of the sixth, 
247 
the lords of the eighth and the ninth are in the fifth and the lord 
of the first is debilitated. 
(11) If benefics occupy the sixth, eighth, and the twelfth, 
malefics occupy the fifth and ninth and the lord of the eleventh 
is weak. 
(12) If the lord of the ascendant is conjoined with a Papa, 
Jupiter and Venus are combust, the lord of the fourth is con- 
joined with a Papa and combust. 
(13) Papas in any of the following houses, aspected by Papar, 
enemies or debilitated planets, cause poverty : 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 
4th, 5th, 7th, 9th, 10th, 11th. 
If there is one Papa fulfilling the above condition, the native 
is poor during childhood; if there are two such Papas, he experi- 
ences poverty in middle age, if there are three such Papas, there 
is poverty in' old age. 
These rules have been given to provoke thought in regard to 
the principles underlying the Yogas and help develop a sense of 
discrimination as to how the distribution of planets by sign and 
house or their combination or aspects cause good or evil effects. 
Twelfth House 
If the lord of the twelfth is in the ascendant, the native is good 
looking and has good powers of speech. If the lord of the twelfth 
is in the twelfth, the native spends generously and owns cattle. 
The lord of the twelfth in the ninth makes one religious. He visits 
holy places, but if the lord of the twelfth is in the ninth con- 
joined with a malefic, the native commits sinful acts instead. 
If benefics occupy the twelfth, the native is philanthropic and 
spends on charity or auspicious celebrations, purchase of property 
etc., and generally his money is well spent. Jupiter herein inclines 
one to benevolence and to give in charity for the education of 
others and such other good objects. Venus herein inclines one to 
spend on luxuries, pleasures and women. Benefics make one save 
money also. Malefics herein cause heavy expenditure on unworthy 
objects such as, litigation and also loss in business, speculation, 
etc. It is generally not good if the lord of a house occupies Trik, 
but if the lord of the twelfth occupies the sixth or the eighth, it 
is considered good. If a male planet occupies twelfth, the native 
spends more on males; if a female planet tenants the twelfth, he 
spends more on females. 
248 
Mark the house tenanted by the lord of the twelfth and the 
houses he aspects. The expenses will mostly be on objects and 
affairs governed by this house, tenanted or aspected. If the lord 
of the twelfth is conjoined with a benefit, the money will be well 
spent and on a good cause connected with the house tenanted or 
aspected; if the twelfth lord is conjoined with a Papa, the money 
will be ill spent in connection with the houses whose lord con- 
joins or which the lord of the twelfth tenants or aspects. 
Similarly, judge according to the Karaka conjoined with the 
lord of the twelfth. There will be expenditure on illness, treat- 
ment or due to enmity if conjoined with the lord of the sixth. If 
the lord of the twelfth is conjoined with Jupiter, then on sons or 
religious acts. If with Venus on wife or women, with Moon on 
the mother, with Sun on the father or in connection with 
the government, with Mercury on friends or in dealings with 
others, with Mars on brothers and quarrels, with Saturn on serv* 
ants and low people. If the lord of the eighth is conjoined with 
the lord of the twelfth, there will be expenses connected with 
death. 
If there is a benefit in the ninth and the lords of the first and 
the twelfth are conjoined or mutually aspect each other, there is 
expenditure on pilgrimages. 
If the lords of the fifth, ninth, and the twelfth and Jupiter are 
beneficially conjoined, there is expenditure on good objects, such 
as, sons, education, religious and benevolent undertakings, etc. 
If the lord of the ascendant, the Sun or Venus is in the twelfth, 
there is trouble to the left eye. Mars or Saturn in the twelfth 
causes premature teeth troubles. They also impair eyesight. Mars 
causes heavy over-draft accounts and indebtedness. We have 
observed in many birth charts that Mars in the eighth or the 
twelfth also leads to hospitalisation. living abroad or imprisonment. 
If Jupiter is in the twelfth, the native becomes clever in his 
work, whether domestic or business, at a comparatively young 
age. 
The above rules in regard to judging each house provide cer- 
tain guide lines to help develop the powers of discrimination and 
judgment. Each birth chart is different from the other. All charts 
have different patterns and no rules could be wide enough to 
cover all the permutations and combinations possible. In the texts 
on Hindu astrology, many thousands of such rules have been 
249 
given and it is not possible to reproduce them in a text-book for 
beginners. So readers are expected to take a clue from the rules 
and general observations made in this chapter and proceed with 
the examination of the chart and the patent or latent possibilities. 
Each placement by sign and house, the conjunction of planets 
benefics or malefics. or their aspects, have to be taken into account 
in arriving at the resultant inference. 
CHAPTER 
CALCULATION OF MAHADASHAS AND 
ANTARDASHAS 
so far we have been dealing with what astrology is and what 
effects the planets produce according to their placement by sign, 
house, combinations or aspects. Now we shall tackle the problem 
of "when" — that is, when the good or bad effects reflected in the 
radix (birth chart) will be felt. 
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru spent some of his time in prison; 
the same man became the Prime Minister of India and almost 
reigned for seventeen years. When the timings of evil planets 
were current, it was a period of struggle, strife and suffering 
for him, when the timings were for the blessed planets to shed 
their benefic light, he was surrounded with all possible luxuries 
and enjoyed virtually the powers and privileges of a king. 
In smaller or greater measure, we all have such cycles of fortune 
and misfortune. There are very few people who do not suffer these 
alternate cycles. But there is a difference: those in whose charts 
planets for riches and wealth are strong, do not suffer and go down 
financially, to the same extent as do those who have unfavourable 
planetary positions in regard to money. That is why all these 
chapters have been written to enable the readers to judge the 
radix. If the birth chart is strong for wealth, even under adverse 
periods, the native would not be reduced to dismal poverty. 
Conversely, if it is a poor horoscope for money, the native will 
not, even during the brightest periods — rise to dizzy heights. The 
251 
influences operative at birth do not affect the monetary matters 
alone, but all departments of life. 
These timings, good or bad, are referred to as periods. They 
are called in "Sanskrit Mahadasha or simply Darha. Some astrolo- 
gers describe them as major periods because the prefix 'Maha' 
in Sanskrit means great or major. If a planet is good and strong, 
his period would be beneficial; the converse will be the case if 
the planet is afflicted in the radix and portends evil. 
The first point, therefore, is to calculate when a particular 
period, i.e., period of a particular planet, will be operative. This 
is described below. 
In Hindu astrology, the seven planets and Rahu and Ketu are 
taken into account. Other planets, such as Herschel, Neptune or 
Pluto are not at all taken cognisance of. 
(a) The maximum duration of life an individual is expected 
to live is taken as 120 years. Each of the planets has his period 
for the number of years as noted below: 
Sun 6, Moon 10, Mars 7, Mercury 17, Jupiter 16, Venus 20, 
Saturn 19, Rahu 18 and Ketu 7. 
(b) We have given the above list in the order of planets pre- 
siding over the week days and the nodes in the end. But their 
periods do not follow the above order. The order of periods of 
the nine planets (we have referred to Rahu and Ketu also as 
planets only for convenience of expression, though we are aware 
that these two are only nodes) is as follows : 
Ketu, Venus, Sun, Moon, Mars, Rahu, Jupiter, Saturn, Mercury. 
Why the order is as above and why the number of years allotted 
to each planet varies is a big question mark in Hindu astrology. 
Some authors have tried to explain this, but the reasoning is far 
fetched and not convincing. As regards the order in which these 
planets operate, the following explanation has been offered. 
The following sets of constellations are presided over by planets 
noted against each. 
Constellations Planet 
*Magha 
P. Phalguni 
U. Phalguni 
Hasta 
Chitra 
Moola 
P. Ashadha 
U. Ashadha 
Shrawan 
Dhanishtha 
Ketu 
Venus 
Sun 
Moon 
Mars 
252 
Ardra Swati 
Punarvasu Vishakha 
Pushya Anuradha 
Ashlesha Jyeshtha 
Shatabhisha Rahu 
P. Bhadra Jupiter 
U. Bhadra Saturn 
Revati Mercury 
The longitudes in each sign, covered by each of the constella- 
tions, have been given earlier and readers are referred to Chapter 
1. Each of the planAshadha-andver three constellations; thus Ketu 
presidesof.the.planet, Magha and Moola; Venus presides over 
Bharani, P. Phalguni, and P. Ashadfla.„and on... 
The first Mahadasha at birth is that of'the,plinet which presides 
over the constellation occupied by the Moon at the time of 
birth and other Mahadashas follow in the order given in (b) above. 
For example, if the Moon is at birth in Ashwini, the order of 
the Mahadashas will be Ketu, Venus, Sun, Moon, Mars, Rahu 
Jupiter, Saturn, Mercury.. If at birth the Moon is in Pushya, the 
order of the Mahadashas will be Saturn. Mercury,Venus. 
VenusMoon., Moon, Mars, Rahu and Jupiter. Again, if the Moon 
was at birth in Revati, the order of Mahadashas will be Mercury, 
Ketu, Venus, Sun, Moon, Mars, Rahu, Jupiter and Saturn. 
Few persons are however lucky enough to have all the nine 
Mahadashas, for their total extends to 120 years. How many 
people live upto that age? Some have two or three, others four 
or five and yet others six or seven Mahadashas and then life comes 
to an end. A few die in their first Dasha only. 
One more point needs explaining. The duration of initial 
Mahadasha depends upon the distance covered by the Moon in 
the particular constellation. Suppose the Moon has just enAswini. 
swini, then the native will have full quota of the Ketu 
Mahadasha comprising seven years. But if the Moon has covered 
one-fourth of Aswini, say 3° 20' of Aswani (the total span of 
each constellation in space is 13° 20'), then , one-quarter of 7 
years, i.e., one year nine months should be deducted out of 
7 years and the balance of Ketu Mahadasha at birth will then be 
5 years 3 months after birth; then Venus for 20 years; then Sun 
for 6 years and so on. - 
Fet us take another example. Suppose the longitude of the 
Moon at birth is 23° 20' in Pisces. Reference to an earlier chapter 
will show that Revati extends from 16° 40' to 30° Pisces. Now 
23° 20' is just the mid-point between 16° 40' and 30°. So the 
253 
native will have half of the full quota of 17 years of Mercury, 
i. e., a balance of 8 years 6 months of Mercury Mahadasha, then 
7 years of Ketu, then 20 years of Venus, and so on. 
The balance is calculated on the basis of the rule of three only 
in case of the first Mahadasha. The subsequent Mahadashas have 
their full quota. 
A ready reckoner to ascertain the balance Mahadasha at birth, 
on the basis of the Moon's longitude at birth, has been given 
on the next pages which will save readers the inconvenience of 
calculating by rule of three. 
TABLE I 
BALANCE OF VINSHOTTARI MAHADASHA 
BY LONGITUDE OF MOON 
of Anes, 
Moon Leo, Sagitt. 
Taurus 
Virgo. 
Capri. 
Gemini. 
Libra, 
Aquar 
Cancer. 
Scorpio 
Pisces. 
Balance 
of 
Mahadasha 
Balance 
of 
Mahadasha 
Balance 
of 
Mahadasha 
Balance 
of 
Mahadasha 
y m d 
4 6 0 Mars 
4 4 6 
4 2 12 
4 0 18 
3 10 24 
3 9 0 
3 7 6 
3 5 12 
3 3 18 
3 1 24 
m d 
4 0 0 
3 7 6 
3 2 12 
2 9 18 
2 4 24 
2 0 0 
7 6 
1 2 12 
0 9 18 
0 4 24 
y m a 
7 0 0 Sun 
6 9 27 
6 7 24 
6 5 21 
6 3 18 
6 1 15 
5 11 12 
5 9 9 
5 7 6 
5 5 3 
y m a 
3 6 0 ]up 
3 3 27 
3 1 24 
2 11 21 
2 9 18 
0 0 Ketu 
0 20 
0 40 
1 0 
1 20 
1 40 
2 0 
2 20 
2 40 
3 0 
7 15 
5 12 
1 11 
3 20 
3 40 
5 3 0 
5 0 27 
4 10 24 
4 8 21 
4 6 18 
4 4 15 
4 2 12 
4 0 9 
3 10 6 
3 8 3 
3 0 0 
2 10 6 
2 8 12 
2 6 18 
2 4 24 
2 3 0 
2 1 6 
1 11 12 
1 9 18 
1 7 24 
19 OSat 19 0 0 
1 6 27 
1 4 24 
1 2 21 
1 0 18 
0 10 15 
0 8 12 
0 6 9 
0 4 6 
0 2 3 
18 6 9 
18 0 18 
17 6 27 
17 1 6 
16 7 15 
16 1 24 
15 -8 3 
15 2 12 
14 8 21 
4 0 
4 20 
4 40 
5 20 
5 40 
6 0 
6 20 
254 
y m d y m d y m d y m d 
6 40 Ketu 3 6 0 Sun 1 6 0 Rahu 18 0 0 Sat 14 3 0 
7 0 3 3 27 1 4 6 17 6 18 13 9 9 
7 20 1 .1 24 1 2 12 17 1 6 13 3 18 
7 40 2 11 21 1 0 18 16 7 24 12 9 27 
8 0 2 9 18 0 10 24 16 2 12 12 4 6 
8 20 2 7 15 0 9 0 15 9 0 11 10 15 
8 40 2 5 12 0 7 6 15 3 18 11 4 24 
9 0 2 3 9 0 5 12 14 10 6 10 11 3 
9 20 2 1 6 0 3 18 14 4 24 10 5 12 
9 40 111 3 0 1 24 13 11 12 9 11 21 
10 0 19 "Moon 10 0 0 13 6 0 9 6 0 
10 20 1 6 27 9 9 0 13 0 18 9 0 9 
10 40 1 4 24 9 6 0 12 7 6 8 6 18 
11 0 1 2 21 9 3 0 12 1 24 8 0 27 
11 20 1 0 18 9 0 0 11 8 12 7 7 6 
11 40 0 10 15 8 9 0 II 3 0 7 1 15 
12 0 0 8 12 8 6 0 10 9 18 6 7 24 
12 20 0 6 9 8 3 0 10 4 6 6 2 3 
12 40 0 4 6 8 0 0 9 10 24 5 8 12 
13 0 0 2 3 7 9 0 9 5 12 5 2 21 
13 20Ven 20 T 0 7 6 0 9 0 0 4 9 "0 
13 40 19 6 0 7 3 0 8 6 18 4 3 9 
14 0 19 0 0 7 0 0 8 1 6 3 9 18 
14 20 18 6 0 6 9 0 7 7 24 3 3 27 
14 40 18 0 0 6 6 0 7 2 12 2 10 6 
15 0 17 6 0 6 3 0 6 9 0 2 4 15 
15 20 17 0 0 6 0 0 6 3 18 1 10 24 
15 40 16 6 0 5 9 0 5 10 6 1 5 3 
16 0 16 0 0 5 6 0 5 4 24 0 11 12 
16 20 15 6 0 5 3 0 4 11 12 0 5 21 
16 40 15 T 0 5 0 0 4 6 0 Mer 17 0 "0 
17 0 14 6 0 4 9 0 4 0 18 16 6 27 
17 20 14 0 0 4 6 0 3 7 6 (6 1 24 
17 40 13 6 0 4 3 0 3 1 24 15 8 21 
18 0 13 0 0 4 0 0 2 8 12 15 3 18 
18 20 12 6 0 3 9 0 2 3 0 14 10 15 
18 40 12 0 0 3 6 0 1 9 18 14 5 12 
19 0 11 6 0 3 3 0 I 4 6 14 0 9 
19 0 Ven 11 6 0 Moon 3 3 0 Rahu 1 4 6 Mer 14 0 9 
19 20 11 0 0 3 0 0 0 10 24 13 7 6 
19 40 10 6 0 2 9 0 0 5 12 13 2 3 
20 0 10 T 0 2 6 0 Jup 16 0 0 12 9 "0 
20 20 9 6 0 2 3 0 15 7 6 12 3 27 
255 
20 40/Ven. 9 0 0 Moon 2 0 0 Jup 15 2 12 
21 0/ 8 6 0 1 9 0 14 9 18 
21 20 / 8 0 0 1 6 0 14 4 24 
21 40 7 6 0 1 3 0 14 0 0 
22 0 7 0 0 1 0 0 13 7 6 
22 •0 6 6 0 0 9 0 13 2 12 
22 40 6 0 0 0 6 0 12 9 18 
23 0 5 6 0 0 3 0 12 4 24 
23 20 5 0 0 Mars 7 0 0 12 0 0 
23 40 4 6 0 6 9 27 11 7 6 
24 0 4 0 0 6 7 24 11 2 12 
24 20 3 6 0 6 5 21 10 9 18 
24 40 3 0 0 6 3 18 10 4 24 
25 0 2 6 0 6 1 15 10 0 0 
25 20 2 0 0 5 11 12 9 7 6 
25 40 1 6 0 5 9 9 9 2 12 
26 0 1 0 0 5 7 6 8 9 18 
26 20 0 6 0 5 5 3 8 4 24 
26 40 Sun 6 0 0 5 3 0 8 0 0 
27 0 5 10 6 5 0 27 7 7 6 
27 20 5 8 12 4 10 24 7 2 12 
27 40 5 6 18 4 8 21 6 9 18 
28 0 5 4 24 4 6 18 6 4 24 
28 20 5 3 0 4 4 15 6 0 0 
28 40 5 I 6 4 2 12 5 7 6 
29 0 4 11 12 4 0 9 5 2 12 
29 20 4 9 18 3 10 6 4 9 18 
29 40 4 7 24 3 8 3 4 4 24 
30 0 4 6 0 3 6 0 4 0 0 
11 .5 21 
11 0 18 
10 7 15 
10 2 12 
9 9 9 
9 4 6 
8 11 3 
8 6 0 
8 0 27 
7 7 24 
7 2 21 
6 9 18 
6 4 15 
5 11 12 
5 6 9 
5 1 6 
4 8 3 
4 3 0 
3 9 27 
3 4 24 
2 11 21 
2 6 18 
2 1 15 
1 8 12 
1 3 9 
0 10 6 
0 5 3 
0 0 0 
TABLE 11 
PROPORTIONAL PARTS FOR MAHADASHA OF PLANETS 
(To be subtracted from the balance of Dashaior increase by 
minutes of the longitude of moon) 
r 2' 3' 4' 5' 10' 20' 
Ketu or Mars 3.15 6.3 9.45 12.6 15.75 31.5 63 Days 
Venus 9 18 27 36 45 90 180 
Sun 2.7 5.4 8.1 10.8 13.5 27 54 
Moon 4.5 9 13.5 18 22.5 45 90 
Rahu a 8.1 16.2 24.3 32.4 40.5 81 162 
Jupiter 7.2 14.4 21.6 28.8 36 72 144 
Saturn 8.55 17.1 25.65 34.2 42.75 85.5 T71 
Mercury 7.65 15.3 22.95 30.6 38.25 76.5 153 
256 
Strictly speaking, 1 minute or more of arc of the various planets 
yields the above number of days. 
But from the practical point, if the fraction of the day is more 
than half, a full day is taken and if the fraction of the day is less 
than half, it is omitted. 
Another point to emphasise is that in calculating the Maha- 
dasha, a year consisting of 365 days and odd hours is taken as 
constituting 1 year, and a month as 30 solar days (slightly longer 
than the civil day). 
For example, if we have to reckon one year from 1st January 
1970, for purposes of the Mahadarha, it will be over on 1st 
January 1971. 
Example: Let us calculate the Mahadashas of a child born at 
5-30 A.M. Indian Standard Time at Delhi on 1st January 1970. 
On referring to the Ephemeris we find that the longitude of 
the Moon was 17° 15' in Virgo, Now referring to Table I, we 
find that for 17° 20' in Virgo the balance of the Moon is given 
as 4 years 6 months. We have to find what will be the period for 
5' for the Moon Mahadasha. It is 22.5 days. In order to avoid 
fractions we may take it as 23 days. Adding these 23 days to 
4 years 6 months, we get the Moon's balance Mahadasha as 4 
years 6 months 23 days and prepare the Mahadasha table as 
follows : 
TABLE III 
MAHADASHAS 
Duration Till the 
Planet Y. D. M. Age of 
Y. D. M. 
Balance of Moon's 
Mahadasha at birth 4 6 23 4 6 23 
Mahadasha of Mars 7 0 0 11 6 23 
» Rahu 18 0 0 29 6 23 
„ Jupiter 16 0 0 45 6 23 
Saturn 19 0 0 64 6 23 
„ _ Mercury 17 0 0 81 6 23 
/» Ketu 7 0 0 88 6 23 
„ Venus 20 0 0 108 6 23 
. Sun 6 0 0 114 6 23 
- Moon 5 5 7 120 0 0 
257 
Normally astrologers do not complete the cycle of 120 years. 
They leave it at about 80 or 90 years which is generally the longest 
span of life. But one may calculate beyond that age. 
ANTARDASHAS 
The Mahadasha is at times referred to as Dasha (an abbreviated 
form of Mahadasha) and the Antardasha is also referred to as 
Antar only (ail abbreviated form of Antardasha). In South India 
generally Antardasha is referred to as Bhukti. 
There are nine planets, so there are nine Mahadashas. There 
are nine planets, so there are nine Antardarhas also. Each Maha- 
dasha has nine Antardashas. The first Antardasha in each Maha- 
dasha is of the Mahadasha lord and the subsequent Antardashas 
are of other planets in the order of Mahadarhas, e.g., in the Sun's 
Mahadasha there will be nine Antardashas of the Sun, Moon, 
Mars, Rahu, Jupiter, Saturn, Mercury, Ketu, Venus. In the 
Moon's Mahadasha there will be nine Antardashas of the Moon, 
Mars, Rahu, Jupiter, Saturn, Mercury, Ketu, Venus and Sun. 
The period of an Antardasha in a Mahadasha /sin proportion 
to the durations of the Mahadashalords. 
Example: 
What will be the duration of the Suns' Antardasha in the 
Moon's Mahadasha. 
The duration of the Sun's Mahadashais 6 years and that of the 
Moon 10 years. 
In 120 years Sun gets 6 years 
In 1 year Sun gets 6 
Years 
120 
In 10 years Sun gets 6x10 years 
120 
6 months. 
The Tables giving Antardasha periods for each Mahadasha 
follow: 
TABLE IV 
1 Ketu (17 years) 2. Venus (20 years) 3. Sun (6 years) 
u 0 4 27 Venus 3 4 0 Sun 0 3 18 
tus 1 2 0 Sun 1 0 0 Moon 06 t 0 
1 0 4 6 Moon 1 8 0 Mars 0 4 6 
an 0 7 0 Mars 1 2 0 Rahu 0 10 24 
258 
Mars ,0 4 27 Rahu 3 0 0 Jupiter 09 18 
Rahu 1 0 18 JupitAnt 2 8 0 Saturn Oil 12 
Jupiter Oil ,6 Satum Antardar 
ho 
3 2 0 Mercury 010 6 
Saturn 119 210 0 Ketu 04 6 
Venus Oil 27 Ketu 1 2 0 Venus 1 0 0 
4 Moon Examplers) 5. Mars (7 yews) 6. Rahu (18 years) 
Moon 010 0 Mars 04 u Rahu 2 8 12 
Mars 0 7 0 Rahu 1 0 m Jupiter 24 24 
Rahu 1 6 0 Jupiter 011 ad Saturn 210 6 
Jupiter 1 4 0 Saturn 1 1 9 Mercury 2 6 18 
Saturn 1 7 0 Mercury 011 27 Ketu 1 0 18 
Mercury 1 5 0 Ketu 04 27 Venus 3 0 0 
Ketu 0 7 0 Venus 1 2 0 Sun 010 24 
Venus 1 8 0 Sun 04 6 Moon 1 6 0 
Sun 0 6 0 Moon 0 7 0 Mars 1 0 18 
Jupiter 2 1 18 Saturn 3 0 3 Mercury 2 4 27 
Saturn 2 6 12 Mercury 2 8 9 Ketu 011 27 
Mercury 2 3 6 Ketu 1 1 9 Venus 210 0 
Ketu 011 6 Venus 3 2 0 Sun 010 6 
Venus 2 8 0 Sun 011 12 Moon 1 5 0 
Sun 09 18 Moon 1 7 0 Mars 011 27 
Moon 1 4 0 Mars 1 1 9 Rahu 2 6 18 
Mars 011 6 Rahu 210 6 Jupiter 2 3 6 
Rahu 2 4 24 Jupiter 26 12 Saturn 2 8 9 
Antardasha at Birth: 
Having specified the period of each Antardasha in each of the 
Mahadashas what remains to be explained is how to calculate 
the Antardasha at birth. This we shall explain by taking a con- 
crete example. 
Example: 
We have found above that the Moon's Mahadasha at 
birth was 4 years 6 months 23 days. Had the native a full quota 
of 10 years of the Moon's Mahadasha, there would have been 
no need to explain. As the first Antardasha is always of the 
Mahadasha lord, the first ten months would have been the Moon's 
Antardasha in his own Mahadasha, the next seven months of 
Mars' Antardasha in the Moon's Mahadasha and so on (see 
Table IV). But the fact that there is a balance of only 4 years 6 
months 23 days of the Moon's Mahadasha shows that out of the 
259 
full quota of 10 years of the Moon's Mahadasha, 5 years 5 
months 7 days were over before birth. This period already 
undergone prior to birth shows that the following Antardashas 
had already lapsed before birth: 
Moon in Moon 
Mars 
Rahn 
Jupiter 
Saturn 
And the balance Antardasha of Saturn was (1 year 7 months 
minus 1 year 2 months 7 days) 4 months 23 days. So we write 
as follows: 
TABLE OF ANTARDASHAS IN THE MAHADASHA 
OF MOAntardarhas 
Y. M. D. 
0 10 0 
0 7 0 
1 6 0 
1 4 0 
1 2 7 
5 5 7 
Balance of Saturn' Antardasha 
in the Mahadasha of Moon at birth: 
Mercury in Moon 
Ketu 
Venus „ 
Sun „ 
Duration 
M. D. 
0 4 23 
15 0 
0 7 0 
18 0 
0 6 0 
Till the Age of 
Y M D. 
0 4 23 
1 9 23 
2 4 23 
4 0 23 
4 6 23 
TABLE OF ANTARDASHAS IN THE MAHADASHA 
OF MARS 
Duration Till the age of 
Mars in Mars 
Rahu 
Jupiter 
Saturn 
Mercury 
Ketu , 
Venus 
Sun 
Moon 
0 4 27 
1 0 18 
0 11 6 
119 
0 11 27 
0 4 27 
12 0 
0 4 6 
0 7 0 
4 11 20 
6 0 8 
6 11 14 
8 0 23 
9 0 20 
9 5 17 
10 7 17 
10 11 23 
11 6 23 
And in a similar manner we calculate the Antardashas in the 
subsequent Mahadashas. 
CHAPTER 
MAHADASHAS - MAJOR PERIODS 
OF PLANETS AND JUDGMENT this 
is the most important chapter dealing with the timing of 
events. Each step has to be carefully followed and the various 
points of view carefully understood and synthesised. If readers 
go by one point of view alone, the judgment is likely to be 
misleading. In the first instance, the various factors determining 
the effects of Mahadashas may appear too many or at times con- 
tradictory, for example, if a planet is strong by sign and placed 
in a good house, it should naturally show good effects; but if 
he is the lord of an evil.house or aspected by Papas, he should show 
evil effects. But we shall explain how to reconcile these opposite 
views and declare the resultant effects he will show during his 
Mahadasha. 
The simple solution is that he will show both the good as well 
as the evil effects. For example, if Taurus is the rising sign and 
Saturn is in the fifth house as lord of the ninth and tenth houses 
he will prove good for the affairs of these two houses, but due to 
his fifth house tenancy, he may impair the affairs of the fifth 
house — cause stomach troubles, formation of gases, damage 
the digestive tract or cause ill-health to children. 
Or take another example. Suppose the sign Cancer is rising and 
Jupiter, the lord of the sixth and ninth, occupies the tenth house. 
Now as lord of the ninth in the tenth, he will give fillip to official 
status and position and increase the respect commanded by the 
261 
native. Jupiter in the tenth will fully aspect the second house; 
thus there may be increase in wealth also. Jupiter will fully aspect 
the fourth house, so additions to landed properties may also be 
expected. Jupiter is Karaka for sons, piety, religion, etc., and 
during Jupiter's Mahadasha, sons may prosper; or if the native 
is young there may be birth of a son, the native may go on a 
pilgrimage, he may perform special religious services connected 
with devotional worship: But since Jupiter in the above example is 
the lord of the sixth house also, his Mahadasha may give rise to 
increased enmity and opposition. 
Thus the planet shows the effect (1) of the house he owns, (2) 
the house he occupies, (3) the sign he is in, (4) the houses he 
aspects, (5) he also kindles into action the effects of the planet or 
planets he aspects or conjoins with, (6) he himself is modified in 
yielding effects according to the planet or planets that conjoin or 
aspect him. 
In Chapter 8 have been given the effects of planets in the 
different signs and in Chapter 9 the effects of the planets in houses. 
What each house stands for has been fully discussed in Chapter 7. 
Readers will thus be able to arrive at fairly good judgment in 
regard to the quality and effects of each Mahadasha if they refer to 
the effects delineated in Chapters 7, 8 and 9 and then draw conclu- 
sions from them. We have come across a large number of text- 
books on Hindu astrology in which we find paragraphs describing 1 
the effects of Mahadashas. But since no two horoscopes are alike 
how can this ready-made prediction like ready-made suits fit 
every one? The result is that the predictions go wrong. It is to 
guard against such pitfalls that we invite reference to previous 
chapters. If a planet has been according to the canons of astrology, 
described as yielding certain effects, he will during his Mahadasha 
yield those results. If the natal effect has been described as good, 
he will during his Mahadasha yield good results as described 
for the planet. If his effect given in the previous chapters is evil, 
he will yield evil results in regard to those matters which have 
been stated earlier. If on some counts he is good radically and 
evil on others, he will show mixed trends. But in judging the 
quality sometimes there is a set-off also. For example, a planet is 
lord of good houses and occupies a good house, but occupies his 
sign of debilitation or is aspected by a Papa. Under such circum- 
stances, his intensity of showing good effects will be set-off, due 
262 
to occupation of a weak sign or receiving a Papa aspect. Conversely, 
a planet may be lord of an evil house and occupy evil house, 
but if he tenants his exaltation sign or own sign and is conjoined 
with a benefic, he may not yield such evil results as his lordship 
and tenancy of houses warrant. 
Different streams of evaluation in regard to Mahadashas and 
Antardashas flow in one channel and state principles for judging 
the Mahadasha effects. We give four of these below : 
(A) Judge each planet as giving effect, during his Mahadasha, in 
respect of matters for which he is a Karaka or which is signified 
by him. If he is well placed by sign and house, conjoined with or 
receiving the aspect of benefics, he will show good effects in 
respect of all matters he is significator for. If on the other hand, 
he occupies an evil sign, an evil house, and is conjoined with 
or aspected by Papas he will show evil effects in regard to 
matters for which he is a significator or a Karaka. We shall 
explain this. Suppose Jupiter is good and strong and bene- 
ficially conjoined and aspected. Jupiter is Karaka for wealth, sons, 
education, religion, respect, etc. So, during his Mahadasha, all 
these matters would augment and show good' effects. Now take 
the reverse example. Suppose Jupiter is afflicted in a weak sign, 
and evil house and conjoined with a malefic, or aspected by a 
Papa. Then under such circumstances all matters, such as, wealth, 
sons, religious undertakings, respect, etc., would suffer. In short, 
if the planet is strong the matters for which he is a Karaka prosper; 
if he is weak and afflicted, these suffer. 
(B) Another point of view in judgment is the ownership of 
houses. Various matters have been assigned to each house. Mat- 
ters governed by each house have been given in detail, but one 
need not take into consideration each one of them. One has to 
pick and choose. For example, cattle are judged from the fourth 
and the sixth also. People living in large cities and towns have no 
facilities for keeping cows or buffaloes. So it would be idle to take 
cattle into consideration — whether they would increase or decrease 
during the Mahadasha of the lord of the fourth or the sixth house. 
But when we are examining the birth chart of an agriculturist, 
it may be a relevant point worth considering. But such matters 
as health, wealth, happiness are common to all. We need not add 
that common sense would prelude consideration of marriage or 
birth of a son if the native is only a child. Strong Marakas (death 
263 
inflicting planets) do not kill the native if he is young, if his health 
is good and he is ordained to live a long life. But if the same 
Mahadasha were current in old age, it would kill the native. This 
is just to show how we have to discriminate in fixing the role of 
the Mahadasha -according to the stage in life and 
probabilities. Here again we have to examine each lord of the 
house whose Mahadasha is current. If the lord of the house is 
strong and well placed he would produce good effects 
pertaining to the matters of the house he is lord of, tenants and 
aspects. If the lord of the first house is well placed and strong, 
whether malefic or benefic, he does not damage the house he 
tenants or aspects; but if the planet is a malefic and not the lord 
of the first but of other houses, then during his Mahadasha he may 
bestow good effects in matters governed by the house or houses he 
owns, but being a natural malefic he would spoil the house he 
occupies or aspects. Here also all benefics are not always 
wholly benefic nor all malefics wholly malefic. 
(i) A natural benefic, if he owns a good house such as a trine 
becomes fully benefic. 
(ii) A natural benefic if he owns an evil house acts in a beneficent as 
well as a malignant manner. For example, if the sign Taurus is 
rising, Venus would be the lord of the first and the sixth house, 
and if he occupies the seventh house, then due to ownership of 
the sixth house, he has a streak of malignancy also and his 
placement in the seventh would give pleasures of sex, partnership, 
etc., but would damage the. health of the wife as well. 
(iii) A malefic, if he is the lord of an evil house, would be 
fully malignant. 
(iv) A malefic, if he is the lord of good houses, will not be so 
malignant and would not greatly damage the house tenanted. For 
example, if Cancer or Leo is rising, Mars would be the lord of an 
angle and a trine and his occupation of a house would not damage 
it very much. To revert to the main point, if the planet is strong 
and well placed, he would show good effects pertaining to matters 
governed by the house or houses he is lord of. The third point 
usually followed by astrologers is as given below. 
(C) The third point of view is in a way an offshoot of (B) above. 
Certain planets have been declared as yielding good results during 
their Mahadashas according to the sign rising; others have been 
declared to yield unfavourable results. Here the main criteria are 
264 
the ownership of houses and their Sambandha with lords of other 
houses. In subsequent pages we shall take up each of the ascen- 
dants and state which planets would yield good results for a 
particular ascendant and which would create evil effects. 
(D) In the fourth place we shall group all miscellaneous consi- 
derations which assist in ascertaining the quality of the Mahadasha. 
A. MAHADASHA EFFECTS ON THE BASIS 
OF KARAK AS 
Each planet is Karaka for certain matters and affairs. According 
to the delineation of effects of planets in signs and houses, readers 
have to exercise their judgment and find out whether a particular 
planet is strong or weak,- good or bad. If he is good he will 
promote the matters and affairs for which he is a Karaka. In 
Chapter 6 on planets, have been given some of the matters 
- for which a particular planet is Karaka. Here we are giving a 
consolidated list, so that readers may at a glance know whether 
(if the Karaka is strong) benefits would accrue from or pertaining 
to the matters governed by him or he will come to harm or suffer 
in respect of the matters (if the Karaka is weak and afflicted). 
Sun. The soul, self-realisation, worship of lord Shiva, body, 
health, belly, eye, bile, diseases of the head, power, splendour, strife, 
harshness, courage, valour, strenuous effort, royal favour kingdom, 
government, position, activity in public, high status, long standing 
anger, hostility, capture of the enemy, enmity, intense severity, good 
strength, father, fortress, fire, heat, taste, bitter articles, thorny 
trees, grass, timber, forest cattle, old people, land, square or cir- 
cular shaped things, bones, medicines, position, roaming over 
mountains, travelling, rubies, pearls, orange or red coloured 
articles, coarse or rough cloth, the eastern direction, etc. 
Now we shall explain how to interpret these. If the Sun is 
strong, during the Sun's Mahadasha, the soul will feel strong, the 
native may make efforts for self-realisation, live splendidly, 
may travel far and wide, may be engaged in strife or 
hostility which may yield him good dividends. His father may 
have a rise or he himself may benefit from his father; he may 
have rise of position and status, exhibit physical strength and 
courage, gain by dealing in timber, thorny trees, forest contracts, 
circular or square shaped articles, coarse cloth, medicines, medi 
265 
cinal herbs, poisons, red or orange coloured articles, and so on. 
On the other hand, if the Sun is weak and afflicted, he may feel 
inner weakness, his physical and mental prowess may decline, 
there may be health troubles, diseases of the stomach, eyes, teeth 
or mental ailments. He may suffer at the hands of his father, or 
his father may suffer in health or die. There may be demotion in 
rank and status, displeasure of the government, loss by dealing 
in timber, forest contracts, medicines, coarse cloth, round or 
circular shaped things, etc. 
Each item for which the Sun is Karaka or any planet is Karaka 
cannot in the very nature of things apply to all individuals. In 
this world there are millions of things. They fall in the portfolio of 
some planet or the other. Thus, a planet is a Karaka for thou- 
sands of matters and things. Every native, according to his 
environment, is connected with a few of them only, and the 
astrologer has to discriminate which items are likely to affect him. 
If a person is in government service the favour of the government 
or a rise in position are likely effects, if the Sun is strong; but if 
the Sun is weak, he may miss the chance of promotion or may be 
reprimanded or demoted or suffer a dismissal if the planet is 
severely afflicted. The art of interpretation is a delicate one and 
requires commonsense as well as practice and experience. We have 
merely given the guidelines for interpretation and the readers have 
to exercise their own judgment and discrimination. 
Moon. Intelligence, mind, heart, disposition, happiness, plea- 
sure, splendour, fame, eating good food, blood and vital energy, 
favours, face, beauty, facial lustre, impartiality, diseases arising 
out of wind (Vata) and phlegm, sleep, lethargy, epilepsy, belly, 
enlargement of spleen, consumption, fluid formations in the body, 
fevers due to cold, typhoid fever, mother, good perfume, flowers, 
women comforts of the bed, wells, tanks, pearls, the nine gems, 
middle aged people, nourishment, saline taste, white articles, shin- 
ing things, silver, bell metal, royalty, wealth, getting a job, north- 
western direction, fish and other aqueous animals, fine cloth, silk, 
sugarcane, good fruit, Brahmans, worship of goddess Gauri, etc. 
Thus if the Moon is well placed by sign and house and 
beneficially aspected, the native may during the Moon's Mahadasha 
have a cheerful heart, a happy and vigorous mind, his facial 
lustre may increase; he may have at his disposal flowers and 
perfumes, and comforts of the bed. He may obtain a good job or 
266 
there may be rise in status or there may be gain of money from 
women or the favours or patronage of women or from a queen; 
he may gain by dealing in silver, pearls, gems, sugar-cane, aqueous 
products, white articles and from the north western direction, he 
may pay homage to Brahmans and worship goddess Durga, etc. 
But if the Moon is afflicted, his health may suffer, he may have 
ailments arising out of imbalance of Vata (such as, blood pressure) 
or Kapha (phlegm) or from enlargement of the spleen, typhoid 
fever, etc., he may lose a job or there may be demotion in rank 
or status, there may be loss from or quarrel with women, dis- 
pleasure of the queen, enmity with women and loss thereby. The 
native may not feel sufficiently energetic and may be lethargic, 
indolent, sleepy. There may be loss by dealing in sugar-cane, 
silver, silk, etc. His mother may suffer ill-health or die, etc. 
We have to pick and choose some items which may be appli- 
cable to the native, his environment and probabilities. 
Mars. Prowess, stamina and strength, hostility, virility, genero- 
sity, anger, cleverness, firmness, quarrels, enemy's strength, king- 
ship, arms, wearing arms ( for battle), battle, service, ministership, 
wickedness, fickleness of mind, hatred, independence, sound of a 
trumpet, seeing, eating meat, bile, blood, heat, wounds, urinary 
diseases, hot and inflammatory diseases, marrow, breaking of a 
limb, axe, forester, quadrupeds, brothers and sisters, land, earthen 
things, burnt things, jewels, gold, goldsmith, copper, beautiful cloth, 
red articles, square shaped things, southern direction, wild animals, 
an authority inflicting punishment, serpent, god Subrahmanya, 
Kshatriya caste, people of young age, pungent taste, etc. 
Now, if Mars is strong and well placed during his Mahadasha, 
there may be gain from brothers, favour from persons wielding 
authority, entry into or promotion in military, quasi-military or 
police service where one has to bear arms, or if already in service 
promotion therein, acquisition of land and property, gold, copper 
and jewels, benefit from the southern direction or the native may 
travel in that direction. The native's health would be good, he 
would be optimistic and have a feeling of strength and stamina, 
he would be dashing and courageous and achieve much with his 
daring and persistence, etc.' But if Mars is weak and afflicted, the 
native may have a fall, break his limbs or have wounds, suffer 
from urinary complaints or deterioration of the blood, may 
suffer at the hands of a magistrate, always be in a quarrelsome 
267 
mood, exchange hot words, there may be enmities, litigation and 
hatred and loss thereby. He may be put to loss by a person of the 
Kshatriya caste; there may be loss of wealth, gold, copper, etc. 
The art of interpretation varies from circumstance to circumstance 
and with the subjective appreciation of the astrologer. The back- 
ground of the native must be known — one in military service 
may lose a limb in the thickness of battles, a factory worker may 
do so while operating a machine, a civilian may have an accident. 
All items cannot apply to all people alike. 
Mercury. Speech, neck, navel, softwords, modesty, the nervous 
system, jocular disposition, education, wisdom, writing, impartia- 
lity, mathematics, astrology, proficiency in languages, logic, 
dealing with others in commercial or political spheres, trading, 
doctors, maternal uncle, relations, friends, tranquillity, activity, 
movement, flourishing of the family, dust, garden, horses, treasury, 
infantry, new garments, palatial buildings, green colour, sculpture, 
pilgrimage, worship of lord Vishnu, devotion, people of the 
trading class, the northern direction, wet things, alloys, gold, 
mercury and all products in which this metal is used, emerald, 
jewellery, the art of testing precious stones, mixture of things, etc. 
Now if Mercury is strong and well placed by sign and house, 
the native would be during his Mahadasha inclined to devote 
his time and energy to studies, writing, reading, lecturing or in 
dealing profitably with others; he may act as a middle man, or 
secure the agency or distribution of some product or may be 
engaged in publishing and publicity. There may be gain from 
friends and relations; he may travel to the north or there may be 
financial benefit from that direction; he may be associated with 
young people and may pass a happy time with them or they may 
be a source of monetary gain, etc. 
But if Mercury is weak and afflicted, the native may have to 
suffer from nervous diseases, a bad liver, loss due to bad friends 
and relations; suffer a loss in sculptures, publishing, jewellery, or 
may be the victim of fraud or cheating, or he may be brought 
to book due to his own dishonest acts like cheating, forgery, ante- 
dating of documents, or for defamation and the like. Consider 
those items which may suit the circumstances of the individual. 
Jupiter. Knowledge, wisdom, philosophy, Vedic texts, sacred 
incantations, religion, devotional worship, morals, piety, inclination 
to oblige others, doing good, physical health, stamina, happiness, 
268 
gentleness, misery, devices, softness, brilliance, beautiful house, 
comfortable living, paraphernalia, savings, wealth, treasury, topaz, 
jewels, ornaments, money, eldest brother, grand-father, holy water, 
pilgrimages, Brahmans. cows, chariots, horses, elephants, palan- 
quins, sons, grand-sons, disciples, yellow coloured things, elliptical 
articles, sweet taste, sweet juice, long things, worship of Lord 
Shiva, north-east direction, diseases arising out of imbalance of 
Kapha (phlegm) and fat in the body due to corpulence and good 
living, etc. 
When Jupiter is strong and well placed or forms good Yogas, 
the native is during his Mahadasha inclined to learning and in- 
crease of knowledge. It is one of the best Mahadashas during 
school and college career. If the Mahadasha comes in middle age 
a good Jupiter confers wealth and bestows sons; the native may 
have a good and comfortable life, go on a pilgrimage and have 
auspicious celebrations, such as, investiture of the sacred thread 
ceremony; he may gain from yellow articles, gold, juicy and 
sweet products. In old age, the Mahadasha may bestow grand- 
sons, better income, finances. There may be gain from Brahmans 
and religious people, etc. 
However, if Jupiter is afflicted by sign, house and aspect, his 
Mahadasha would thwart education, bring poverty and cause 
misery. The native would commit irreligious or evil acts, his 
efforts in the north-eastern direction may end in frustration and 
failure, he may lose cows, horses, etc., if he possessed "any. His 
sons and grand-sons may suffer or be hostile to him. In other 
words, instead of there being gain and happiness, there will be 
loss and misery and the negative aspect would predominate. 
Venus. Art, artistic things, beauty and aesthetics, women, 
love, love affairs, sexual enjoyment, semen, eyes, sexual parts, 
marriage, company of women, gentleness, kindness, co-operation, 
amiability, harmony, flowers, scents, perfumes, happiness, all 
kinds of pleasures, passions, desires, dancing, dancing girls, drama, 
theatres, cinemas, singing, music, musical instruments, poetry, 
esteem, respect, good luck, courtesans, short things, sour taste, 
scratching, black hair, taste, happiness from wife, lustre, atten- 
dants, gems, pearls, silver, silk, white and soft materials, liquids, 
buying and selling, horses, elephants, articles of variegated colour, 
swimming, people of the Vaishya caste, people of middle-age, 
beautiful girls, handsome boys, a minister, supporting women, de- 
269 
coration, south-east direction, etc. 
Now, according to the rules of interpretation indicated earlier, 
if Venus is well placed, the native will during his Mahadasha 
acquire things of art and pleasure, he will co-operate with others 
in a harmonious manner and will receive their reciprocal coope- 
ration. He may gain from or through the agency of any of the 
things enumerated above. Love between husband and wife may 
increase or the native may have love affairs. If unmarried, the 
native may be married, daughters may be born or there may be 
other festivities in the house. The native may rise due to the 
patronage or favour of some lady, and so on. 
On the other hand, if Venus is afflicted the native may suffer 
from imbalance of wind (vata) and phlegm (kapha), he may 
have urinary or venereal diseases, his sexual powers may be at a 
low ebb, he may get entangled with some woman and earn a bad 
name and also suffer monetary loss. Favours may be lacking; 
there may be want of cooperation and disharmony at home and 
outside. The circumstances differ from case to case and the above 
is not an exhaustive list of the good and bad effects possible, but 
only illustrative of them. 
Saturn. This planet presides over sorrows, deaths, disabilities, 
diseases arising out of imbalance of Vata (wind), an extreme 
example of which is paralysis, gout, rheumatism, ketabolic acti- 
vity in the human body, old age, decay, annihilation, destruction, 
meanness, stinginess, cheating, treachery, distress, pain, melancho- 
lia, misunderstanding, downfall, accusations, liability to be pro- 
secuted, agnates, misdirected strength, indigestion, wandering, 
servants, dependants, old persons, low caste people, labour, 
labourers, ugly hair, goats, sheep, buffaloes, theft, cruel deeds, 
woods, secluded places, regions where oils and minerals are found, 
dirty places, iron, tin. lead, wool, woollen goods, oil, oilseeds, 
coarse grain, black grain, ashes, articles of black colour, servility, 
unrighteous acts, sins, falsehood, western direction, agriculture, 
machinery, etc. 
If Saturn is well placed and occupies a good position in the 
birth chart, the native may during his Mahadasha rise in service 
by his own strenuous efforts and hard work; he may derive benefit 
from agriculture, cattle, oil, factory, iron, goats, sheep and other 
matters connected with Saturn. He may receive a legacy. But if 
Saturn is afflicted, he may suffer from diseases due to malnutri- 
270 
tion, poverty, litigation, etc. There may be quarrels and disputes 
with old people, deaths in the family or among those near and 
dear to the native. He may have to lead a miserable life due to 
distress all around. There may be impediments and obstacles in 
his path of progress. 
This delineation is based mainly on the Karakatwa (attributes 
of the Karaka), but there are other governing and modifying 
features which we shall deal with later. 
Rahu and Ketu should not be considered unimportant for 
Rahu's Mahadasha extends over 18 years and Ketu's to 7 years. 
Thus these nodes together cover 25 years out of 120, a fairly long 
span of time. As we Ojai' have occasion to discuss later, these 
nodes produce effects according to the sign and house they occupy 
and reflect during their Mahadashas the attributes of the 
planets they are conjoined with but they have significance of their 
own also. It is therefore necessary to specify matters and affairs 
they are significators for. 
Rahu. Kingdom, power, accumulation, gathering, harsh speech, 
falsehood, low caste people, wicked females, cohabitation with 
quadrupeds, impurity, wickedness, breathing, catarrh, acute pain, 
grandfather, movements, travelling, moving in the opposite direc- 
tion, change of place, sorrows, servants, reptiles, south-west direc- 
tion, mountains, old age, an irreligious person, liaisons with 
females or wicked people, bone, enlargement of the spleen, 
cutaneous diseases such as ringworm, eczema, diseases arising 
from imbalance of Vata (wind) and Kapha (phlegm), a bad swell- 
ing, tumour, serpent bite, creeping and crawling creatures, royal 
insignia of umbrella and Charnar*, vehicles, cheating, gambling, 
speculation. 
All the above are governed by Rahu. If Rahu is well placed 
and strong, the native may rise in governmental favour by resort- 
ing to falsehoods, tricks and cunning; he may resort to all kinds 
of unscrupulous methods and gain thereby, such as, black market- 
ing, thefts, evasion of taxes. He may have liaisons with females 
and get enjoyment as well as riches out of them. It is, however, 
observed that there is during this Mahadasha change of place of 
residence or activity. Rahu is a planet presiding over gambling 
and speculation and a strong Rahu may bring in much money. 
* Bushy tail of Bos grunniens used as a fly-whisk or fan and reckoned as 
one of the insignia of royalty. 
271 
But if Rahu is afflicted there may be loss due to matters signified 
by him. The native may suffer from aberration of mind, schizo- 
phrenia, hallucinations and illusions. He may suffer from asthma, 
eczema and other cutaneous diseases. In places where serpents 
abound, there are chances of snake-bite also. It is one 9f the 
worst Mahadashasfov education and if it occurs when the native 
is at school or college his educational career may be broken or 
disrupted. During Rahu Mahadasha, if the planet is evil there 
may be loss of money and loss of reputation through liaison with 
females of loose morals, particulary widows, and complications 
might arise through them. 
Ketu. Worship of God Shiva, Chandi, Ganesh, etc., philosophy, 
divine knowledge, salvation from earthly bondage, all kinds of 
wealth, great penance, religious austerities, friendship, conferring 
of prosperity, luck, all kinds of luxuries, doctor, freedom from 
disease, causing of trouble to enemies, maternal grandfather, 
belly, consumption, pain, hunger, stupidity, thorn, witchcraft, eye 
diseases, wounds, fever, an outcaste, dog, deer, vulture, cock, 
horned animals, and company of servants. 
If Ketu is well placed in the chart the native would during 
his Mahadasha devote time and energy to the perusal of works 
of philosophy and engage in worship, derive much income by 
practice of medicine, and have domestic comforts and luxuries. 
He will be devoted to gods and Brahmans and pay homage to 
them. He will have good luck and freedom from disease. 
But if Ketu is ill-placed in the chart, he may suffer intense 
pain of body and anguish of mind, may have wounds and fever. 
He may be the victim of an accident, have low company and 
suffer bad consequences through them. 
We have succinctly given in the above paragraphs the matters 
and affairs in the portfolio of each planet and tried to provide 
guide-lines how these are to be interpreted in the individual chart. 
Examples for each of the items could not possibly be provided 
in a book of this kind and it is left to the reader to follow the 
guide-lines and come to conclusions relevant to the age, status and 
environment of the native, whose chart is under study. 
Now we shall take up the next point of view-the second stream in 
the channel of interpretation of the effects of the Mahadashas, 
according to the ownership of the house. Before we do so, we 
shall deal with two more features in respect of the effects of 
272 
Karakas'during his Mahadasha. 
(i) If a Karaka is adversely placed from the house he is a 
Karaka for he does not produce very good results in respect of 
the house for which he is a Karaka. A Karaka's location has there- 
fore to be judged not only from the ascendant, but also from the 
house for which he is a Karaka. 
(ii) If the Karaka aspects the lord of the house for which he 
is a Karaka, then during his Mahadasha the affairs of the house 
will progress well. 
B. MAHADASHA EFFECTS ACCORDING TO THE 
OWNERSHIP OF HOUSES IN THE BIRTH CHART 
; large number of rules have been given in the previous 
chapters to indicate whether a planet should be deemed to be 
good and if so to what extent, or evil and if so in what measure. 
All planets act as good if they are well placed by sign and house 
and are conjoined with benefics or aspected by them, or evil if 
they are ill-placed by sign and house and conjoined with malefics 
or aspected by them. Having provided these guidelines, we shall 
deal with the Mahadasha of each lord according to whether he 
is good or evil in the particular chart. Here the expression 'good 
or evil' should not be confused with 'natural benefic or malefic,' 
because in a particular chart, say, for Taurus ascending, Saturn 
in the ninth in Capricorn may be called a natural malefic; but 
may be positively good conversely for Capricorn ascendant, the 
Moon being a natural benefic, the lord of the seventh conjoined 
with the Sun in the eighth in Leo may be evil. So in going through 
the Mahadashas of various planets, according to the house they 
own as given below, we should appraise each house lord on his 
merits or demerits in the birth chart. 
1. (a) If the ascendant lord is strong, the native would during 
the Mahadasha of the lord of the ascendant rise to an eminent 
position, will be happy and maintain good health. His prosperity 
will gradually increase. 
(b) However, if the lord of the ascendant is ill-placed, the 
native's health will suffer, he may be held up or become accursed 
in a case. He will be under apprehension and suffer mental 
anxiety. He will not be able to make any distinctive progress 
during the Mahadasha; rather his attempts will result in failure 
273 
and frustratio". 
2. (a) If the lord of the second is well placed and strong, 
then during his Mahadasha there will be additions to the family, 
acquisition of wealth, good letters will be written and received, 
the native will be able to achieve success due to his speech and 
he will have good food and have a happy time. 
(b) But if the second lord is weak and ill-placed, there will be. 
heavy expenditure, tne bank balance will be depleted, the native 
will write impolitic letters and also receive unpleasant ones; there 
will be eye troubles, the meals will not be savoury; the native 
will not be able to deliver learned discourses, rather his powers 
of expression and eloquence will be at the lowest ebb. There will 
be fear from the government. 
As indicated in Chapter 12, the birth cnart must be examined 
to determine whether the native is destined to have a short, 
medium or long life and if the Mahadasha runs at the appropriate 
time, the lord of second has the propensity to kill the native, 
particularly if he occupies the second, seventh, eighth or the 
twelfth house and has Sambandha with the lord of the seventh. 
3. (a) If the lord of the third house is strong during his 
Mahadasha, there will be a spirit of love, help and cooperation 
between the brothers, good news will be received; the native's 
power and prowess would yield good dividends. The native will 
rise in his career and his work would be commended by others. 
(b) However, if the lord of the third is weak and ill-placed, 
then during his Mahadasha. there will be quarrels and misunder- 
standings with brothers and neignbours, the health of a brother 
or sister may suffer or there be demise of one of them, if there 
is such an indication in the radix. Bad news will be received. 
The trips undertaken will not be successful. There will be mental 
uneasiness and the native will suffer humiliation. 
4. (a) If the lord of the fourth house is strong and well 
placed, then during his Mahadasha there will be help from and 
given to relations, there will be happiness in respect of the mother, 
lands, agriculture, cattle and conveyances. There may be acquisi- 
tions of immovable property and vehicles, happiness from wife, 
friendship with people, promotion in career, contented and peace- 
ful period. 
(b) But if the lord of the fourth house is weak and afflicted 
during his Mahadasha. there will be distress to the native's mother, 
274 
quarrels with friends and relations or sickness may afflict them; 
loss of cattle or immovable property or litigation in connection 
with it, discomfort in respect of conveyance, danger from water, 
general unhappiness and no tranquillity of mind. 
5. (a) If the lord of the fifth is strong and well placed, then 
during his Mahadasha, there will be increase in education and 
learning, birth of sons, or their affairs may progress well, increas- 
ed devotion to God, promotion in career. If the native is in the 
run for a ministership, he may get it. The native has good food 
and drink. His actions will be good and he will earn praise for 
his conduct. He will gain money; there may even be sudden gains, 
if the radix so indicates. 
(b) But if the lord of the fifth is weak and afflicted, then during 
his Mahadasha, there will be illness to children or loss of child 
or children, if the radix so indicates; inharmonious relations with 
sons,, failure in examination, decline in worship of- God. The 
native may have mental troubles, aberration or confusion of mind; 
there will be likelihood of his being the victim of fraud or de- 
ceptions, and wearisome wanderings. The intellectual powers will 
be at a low ebb and there is likely to be failure of the efforts 
made. 
6. (a) If the lord of the sixth is strong (but not stronger than 
the lord of the ascendant) the native would during his Mahadasha 
vanquish his enemies, the native's courage would enhance, he 
would be triumphant over his rivals, compete successfully and 
would have the satisfaction of surpassing others. His health would 
be good, he would earn well, be generous and will not be cowed 
down by others. He will do well in service. 
(b) However, if the lord of the sixth is afflicted, the native 
will during the Mahadasha. perform evil acts and will have to pay 
the penalty for them; he will suffer reverses in fortune and be 
constantly troubled by enemies. His health will suffer and there 
may be some disease as indicated by the sign on the cusp of the 
sixth house or the sixth lord. He will have mental anguish and 
will have to subordinate his wishes to others and suffer humilia- 
tion; he will have trouble from servants, loss of cattle or pets, 
etc. He may lose a job. 
7. (a) If the lord of the seventh is strong and well placed, 
the native will during his Mahadasha purchase additional items 
of luxury, will be happy and enjoy pleasure in the company of 
275 
his wife or other women. There will be auspicious festivities in 
the family connected with marriages, etc. If the native is not 
married, he will get married. He may enter into a business 
partnership or travel successfully. There will be harmony and co- 
operation from all parties the native associates with. 
(b) But if the lord of the seventh is weak and afflicted, there 
will be distress to the native's son-in-law, separation from his 
wife and difficulties and calamities arising out of partnership or 
connected with his wife. He will have liaisons with women and 
suffer from venereal diseases. He may fall ill and if as determined 
by other factors, such as, those shortening the life, or making it 
medium or long, the Mahadasha synchronises with the Maraka 
period, death may occur and particularly so if the lord of the 
seventh is in the second, seventh, eighth or twelfth and has 
Sambandha with the lord of the second, eighth or the twelfth. 
8. (a) If the lord of the eighth is strong but not stronger than 
the first lord and aspected by benefics then during his Mahadasha, 
if the native is under debt, he will discharge his debts. There 
will be a cessation of quarrels; acquisition of cattle, addition of 
servants. The native's affairs will advance favourably and he will 
have elevation in rank. He may gain a legacy, if there is a pro- 
bability of one. He may gain from the import-export business, 
if he is in that line. 
(b) But if the lord of the eighth is weak and has Sambandha 
with Papas, during the Mahadasha, the native will suffer in health, 
he will undergo distress and sorrow, there will be rivalry, jealousy 
and enmity and the native will suffer. There will be loss of wealth 
and reputation. He will be insulted, his endeavours will fail and 
he will wander fruitlessly without achieving his objectives. The 
lord of the eighth is a potential killer also, but for this look to 
the span of life as ascertained by other factors. The Maraka quali- 
ties of the lord of the eighth are increased if he occupies the 
second or the seventh house. 
9. (a) If the lord of the ninth is strong and well placed, then 
during his Mahadasha the native will have a prosperous time in 
the company of his wife and children and grand-children if there 
be any. He will gain in wealth and rank. He will perform acts 
of religious merit and will be much respected. 
(b) But if the lord of the ninth is weak and afflicted, then 
during his Mahadasha the prosperity of the native will be on the 
276 
wane due to the wrath of some deity, because of his own actions 
in this birth or previous ones. He will suffer in the domestic sphere 
and in respect of cnildren and grand-children (fifth from fifth). His 
actions will not be good and his financial position will be weak. 
(10) (a) If the lord of the tenth is strong and well placed, the 
native will during the Mahadashaof the planet be successful in 
his undertakings, will have elevation of rank and status, his pros- 
perity will enhance and he will earn name and fame for himself. 
(b) But if the lord of the tenth is weak, afflicted and occupies 
an evil house, there will be a fall from his station in life; he will 
meet with much disrespect, his efforts will be unsuccessful; his 
trips or travelling will only be a source of discomfort and loss. 
His actions during the Mahadasha will not be good and there 
will be a general setback in his career. 
11. (a) If the lord of the eleventh is strong and well-placed 
then during his Mahadasha, there will be a continuous influx of 
money and there will be happiness in association with family 
members, relations and friends. There may be gain of money 
from associations of people, such as, societies, companies, 
the government, etc. The native's hopes and desires will be ful- 
filled. There will be an addition to the number of servants and 
employees. Good news will be received. 
(b) But if the lord of the eleventh is weak and afflicted, then 
during his Mahadasha, the native will hear bad news, there will 
be trouble to brothers and sons, poverty and humiliation, ear 
trouble. The native may be cheated by others. 
12. (a) If the lord of the twelfth is strong and well aspected. 
and does not occupy the second or the twelfth house, then during 
his Mahadasha the native will.spend money on good causes; he 
will have pleasures and luxuries. He will gain in respect. His 
actions will be good. If the lord of the twelfth is a benefic and 
in his own house in the twelfth or if he occupies the eighth 
house, there will be accumulation of money also. 
(b) If the lord of the twelfth is weak and afflicted, then during 
his Mahadasha the native's vitality will be lowered and he will 
suffer in health; he may go abroad or there may be hospitalisa- 
tion. If the lord is very much afflicted and a malefic is in the 
twelfth and if the lord of the sixth is stronger than the first lord, 
there may be imprisonment. The native's wealth will be dissipated 
and he will incur debts. 
277 
GUIDE-LINES FOR DEDUCTIONS 
We have succinctly stated the Mahadasha effects of a planet 
according as to whether he is the lord of a particular house and ( 
i) strong and well placed, or (ii) weak and afflicted. We will 
leave it to the ingenuity of readers to derive corollaries from the 
main propositions. Those who have gone through a number of 
birth charts and compared events actually occurring during a 
particular Mahadasha, will with the prognostications in the radix, 
have enough experience not to need any guide-lines; but for the 
benefit of those who are new to the subject, we are furnishing 
below a few guide-lines on how to derive corollaries from the 
main proposition. 
(i) If the lord of the third is weak and afflicted, the 
third being sixth from the tenth (father) he may cause 
illness to father. Conversely, if the lord of the first is well placed 
and strong, the first house being lord of the fourth from the tenth ( 
father), the native's father may during the Mahadasha of the 
strong lord of the first, acquire property or conveyances. 
(ii) This principle should be applied to the Karaka also. Sup- 
pose the lord of the seventh, as counted from the native's radical 
Venus is strong and well placed, the native may marry or if 
already married may have an enjoyable time. Conversely, if the 
lord of the seventh from Venus is weak or afflicted, there may be 
illness of the wife or even loss of the wife if the radix so indicates. 
(iii) Another type of corollary derived from the delineations, 
is as follows : suppose the lord of the sixth is weak and afflicted 
and tenants the fifth house (because a contact has been establish- 
ed between the fifth and the sixth houses, due to sixth lord's loca- 
tion in fifth), the son of the native may be antagonistic to the 
father or the son may fall ill. Let us take the converse example: 
if the lord of the sixth is strong and well placed by sign in the 
ninth and well aspected, there may be increase in the general 
good luck and fortune (ninth house) due to an enemy (sixth). He 
may win in litigation. In olden times Indians used to capture 
their enemies' properties. A man may have to visit another place 
due to sickness (sixth house) and contacts there may lead to a 
lucrative business, and so on. Circumstances differ from native to 
native and from case to case. 
(iv) Barring the Sun and the Moon, the other five planets have 
278 
two houses each. Rahu and Ketu's domain is generally confined 
to one house each, the house tenanted by him. But when Rahu 
or Ketu conjoins a planet he bestows the effects not only of the 
house he tenants but of the planet he is conjoined with and if 
such a planet owns a house or two houses a contact is established 
between Rahu (or Ketu) and the houses owned by the conjoining 
planet. For example, say, in a nativity with Leo as ascendant. 
Rahu and Saturn are in Aries in the ninth. Now apart from Rahu 
showing the effect of being in Aries, he has become linked with 
the ninth house (due to his location in the ninth) and the sixth 
and the seventh houses (due to conjunction with Saturn, lord of 
sixth and seventh houses). What we intend to convey is that 
excepting the Sun and the Moon, each of the five planets owns 
two houses. And when there is Mahadasha of a planet owning 
two houses, during the Mahadasha, there may be a connection or 
correlation between the effects pertaining to the two houses. For 
example, if Gemini is rising, Mercury will be the lord of the first 
and the fourth and the native may acquire immovable property ( 
fourth) due to his personal efforts (first). Or to take another exam- 
ple. suppose Gemini is rising and Venus, lord of the fifth, is 
afflicted, he causes financial loss or heavy expenditure during his 
Mahadasha. Then the loss of money or expenditure (twelfth 
house) may have a connection with education, sons, pleasures, 
speculation—any one or more items governed by the fifth house. 
In this way, intelligent readers can draw inference. We cannot 
be so exhaustive in this book as we would like to be, and no 
doubt some readers would like us to be; but the above examples 
will help to develop the power of reasoning on the lines indicated. 
C. FAVOURABLE AND UNFAVOURABLE MAHADASHAS 
FOR THE VARIOUS ASCENDANTS 
The point of view we are dealing below is based on a Sanskrit 
work called Udu-daya Pradeep Ca lamp to shed light on the pro- 
pensities of Mahadashas'). This work is also known as Laghu 
ParasharUdbridg&A to Parashanmethod). Sage Parashar flourished 
thousands of years ago and wrote a monumental work on 
predictive astrology. Several texts of this large work have been 
published, but there are doubts if the texts available are correct 
versions of the original written by the great sage, who is in a 
279 
way treated as the father of Hindu astrology. 
As regards the abridged work Laghu Parasharior Udu-daya 
Pradeep, it is doubtful when it was abridged or compiled and by 
whom; but during the last several centuries, it is being followed 
by astrologers all over India and has acquired a pre-eminent 
place for delineating Mahadasha and Antardasha effects. In this 
system the criteria of good and bad, auspicious and inauspicious, 
are different from those described earlier in the book and the 
rules propounded hereunder should not be mixed or confused 
with those given earlier. What is common to this system and 
others will also be explained. 
1. The signs, lordship of signs, the signs of exaltation and 
debilitation of planets, their aspects, the houses-their order or 
what each of them signifies, the method of calculation of the 
balance of Mahadasha at birth, the duration of each Mahadasha 
and the order in which they follow each other, the durations of 
Antardasha in each Mahadasha and the order in which each 
Antardasha follows the other—all these are common to this system 
and others. 
2. But the definition of Shubhas (auspicious) and Papas ( 
sinful) as given here is different from that given according to 
general precepts in other systems. According to general precepts, 
Jupiter and Venus are auspicious; the Moon (strong in Pakshabala) 
and Mercury not associated with Papas are also auspicious; the 
Sun, Mars and Saturn are malefics in increasing order; Rahn 
and Ketu are also Papas; the Moon (weak in Pakshabala) and 
Mercury associated with malefics are also Papas. But according 
to this system, the natural benefics are not treated as benefics 
nor are natural malefics treated as malefics, because the criteria 
are different. The division of planets into the two groups, (i) be- 
nefic and (ii) malefic is not according to their natural quali- 
ties or attributes, but founded on the basis of ownership of 
houses. A natural benefic may become a benefic if he owns 
certain houses or may become a malefic if he owns certain 
others. Similarly, a natural malefic may become a benefic in a 
particular chart, but he may become a malefic if he owns certain 
other houses in another chart. 
Thus, according to ownership, a natural benefic may become 
a' Papa or a natural malefic may be treated as Shubha. Owner- 
ship of which houses makes a planet Shubha and ownership of 
280 
which others makes any planet inauspicious are dealt with below. 
(A) All lords of trines bestow auspicious results. Any of the 
seven planets if he owns a trine, is auspicious. Because Rahu 
and Ketu do not own any sign, they are not included here. Even 
a natural malefic, such as the Sun. Mars or Saturn, if he owns a. 
trine, becomes auspicious. If natural benefics own a trine they 
become even more auspicious. Of the two lords, those of the 
fifth and the ninth, the latter is stronger in his auspicious attri- 
butes than the former. 
(B) The lord of the third or the sixth or the eleventh is a Papa. 
Whether a natural benefic or malefic, if a planet owns any of these 
three houses, he will be deemed a malefic. Naturally, a malefic 
lord of the third would be a greater Papa than a benefic lord of 
the third. The lord of the sixth is more malefic than the lord of 
the third, and the lord of the eleventh a greater malefic than the 
lord of the sixth. For Aries rising, Mercury will be the lord of 
the third and the sixth. Similarly, for Libra ascendant, Jupiter 
will be the lord of the third and the sixth houses. Thus, when 
one and the same planet becomes the lord of the third and the 
sixth houses, he becomes a still greater Papa. For Gemini ascen- 
dant, Mars would be lord of the sixth and the eleventh: similarly 
for Sagittarius rising Venus would be the lord of the sixth and 
the eleventh. In these two cases, the same planet being lord of 
the sixth and the eleventh houses, he would become a more male- 
fic Papa. 
A question and a very relevant one now arises as to what hap- 
pens when a planet owns two houses and one of these houses 
happens to be a trine and the other the third, sixth or eleventh. 
For example, when Cancer is the ascendant. Sagittarius will be 
the sixth sign as counted from Cancer and therefore the sixth 
house and Pisces will be the ninth sign as counted from the ascen- 
dant and therefore the ninth house. Let us reiterate the basic 
principle of Hindu astrology that the signs and houses are 
synonymous and houses are counted from sign to sign. Western 
astrologers are requested to forget about Placidian or other house 
division methods. Astrologers of India are also requested not to 
bring in Shripati's method or Keshava's method of house division 
by trisecting the distance between the meridian and the rising 
degree and marking the domain of each house. Here in this book 
has been stated the oldest and the most authoritative method of 
281 
counting houses signwise. 
Let us revert to the point under discussion. For Cancer ascen- 
dant, Jupiter becomes lord of the sixth and the ninth; for Virgo 
rising, Saturn becomes the lord of the fifth and the sixth; for 
Capricorn ascendant, Mercury becomes the lord of the sixth and 
the ninth. Under these circumstance, when in the portfolio of 
these three planets, one house is the sixth and the other a trine ( 
fifth or ninth), what will be the resultant position - whether in 
the above cases cited are Jupiter, Saturn and Mercury to be 
declared Shubha (due to ownership of a trine) or evil (due to 
ownership of the sixth)? The reply to the above enquiry will be 
that for Cancer ascendant, Jupiter and for Capricorn ascendant, 
Mercury has been declared a Shubha (auspicious). For Virgo 
ascendant, his good ownership of the fifth is set off against the 
evil ownership of the sixth house and so Saturn has neither been 
declared as auspicious nor as inauspicious. 
(C) Ordinarily, the lord of an angle if a benefic, is auspicious, 
and if a malefic he is not auspicious. On the other hand, if a 
malefic is the lord of an angle and also the lord of a trine, he 
confers good results. If a benefic is the lord of an angle and also 
the lord of the third, sixth or the eleventh house, he does not 
during his Mahadasha confer auspicious results. But if a Papa 
is the lord of an angle and also a lord of the third, sixth or the 
eleventh, he confers during his Mahadasha, Papa results. 
(D) The lords of the second and the twelfth houses by them- 
selves, if isolated from other influences, have neither ken de- 
clared as Shubha (auspicious) nor as Papas. 
If the lord of the second or the twelfth has Sambandha, 
(i) with the lord of a trine, he confers auspicious results; 
(ii) with the lord of third, sixth or the eleventh, he confers 
Papa results; 
(iii) with the lord of an angle who is a Shubha, he is Shubha; 
(iv) with the lord of an angle who is a Papa, he confers Papa 
results; 
(v) with the lord of the eighth, then too he is a Papa. 
Excepting the Sun and the Moon, the other five planets own 
two houses each. So if the other house owned by the lord of the 
second or the twelfth is, 
(i) a trine, he is a Shubha; 
(ii) third, sixth, or eleventh, then he is a Papa; 
282 
(iii) an angle and the planet is a natural benefic, then he con- 
fers results as a Shubha; 
(iv) an angle and the planet is a natural malefic, then he 
is a Papa. 
Lords of the first, fourth, seventh and the tenth are strong in 
increasing order, i.e., the lord of the fourth is stronger than the 
lord of the first. 
(E) We have dealt with the criteria for judging the lords of 
the fifth, ninth, third, sixth, eleventh, fourth, seventh, tenth, secopd 
and twelfth. The ascendant is considered both an angle and a 
trine and the ]Ord of the first is always auspicious. Thus the 
lords of all the twelve houses, except the eighth, have been dis- 
cussed. As regards the lord of the eighth, because he is the lord 
of the twelfth (expenditure) as counted from the ninth house ( 
good luck, fortune and general prosperity), he is not auspicious. 
Two provisos have, however, been added to this dictum. 
(i) If one and the same planet is the lord of the first and the 
eighth, he is auspicious. This can apply only to Aries and Libra 
ascendants because when Aries is rising, Mars becomes the lord 
of the first and the eighth, and when Libra is rising, Venus is 
the lord of the first and the eighth houses. 
(ii) When the Sun or the Moon is the lord of the eighth house, 
no Dosha or stigma is attached to the luminary on account of 
ownership of the eighth house. One view is that slight Dosha 
is attached, but being negligible it is ignored. However if the Sun 
is in Leo in the eighth, or the Moon in Cancer in the eighth, they 
have no Dosha. 
One of the corollaries arising from the above is that the lord 
of the twelfth as counted from each of the houses will be detri- 
mental (because it represents expenditure, exhaustion, emaciation) 
to the house from which it is the twelfth lord. Thus a lord of the 
twelfth from the seventh, i.e., the sixth lord, will during his 
Mahadasha, damage the seventh house, the lord of the twelfth 
from the fifth, i.e.. the fourth lord, would damage the fifth house 
affairs, and so on. 
(iii) If the Sun or the Moon be the lord of the eighth and 
posited in the eighth, he is Shubha. 
(iv) If the lord of the eighth owns the first, fifth or the ninth 
also (for Aries and Libra ascendants, he will own the first as well; 
for Leo and Aquarius he will own the fifth as well; for Gemini, 
283 
he will own the ninth also) and is posited in the eighth, he con- 
fers good results during his Mahadasha. 
(F) Having discussed the lordship of the twelve houses and 
the general circumstances under which he becomes a Shubha or 
a Papa, certain additional rules are provided. 
A natural malefic, if he owns an angle, does not become a 
Shubha only by virtue of lordship of an angle. He becomes a 
Shubha only when he owns a trine also. For example, let us 
consider three charts where Mars is the lord of an angle. 
(i) When Cancer is the rising sign, Mars is the lord of the 
fifth and the tenth. 
(ii) When Leo rises, Mars becomes the lord of the fourth and 
the ninth. 
(iii) When Aquarius is the ascendant, Mars rules the third and 
the tenth houses. 
Here in (i) and (ii) above Mars owns an angle as well as a trine. 
He is. therefore, a Shubha for Cancer and Leo ascendants. But in ( 
iii) above, while Mars owns an angle (the tenth house), he does 
not own a trine, so he does not become a Shubha but remains a 
Papa. 
(G) The eighth is the house of longevity; when we look at the 
positive side of this house, it is called longevity; when we look 
to the negative side, it is called death. From the eighth from the 
eighth, i.e., the third house also, we judge longevity and as stated 
earlier, the twelfth from each of these two houses (the eighth and 
the third), i.e., the seventh and the second houses, stand for ex- 
penditure, exhaustion or annihilation of longevity, i.e., end of 
life. The second and the seventh therefore are called Maraka ( 
killing) houses and the lord of the second and seventh are 
Markesha (killer). Of the seventh and the second lords, the 
latter is a stronger Maraka than the former. And if the Mahadasha 
of any of these two is running, when according to the general 
examination of the radix—the birth chart—and determination of 
longevity as discussed in Chapter 12, the death of the native may 
appear probable, then the Mahadasha of the lord of the second 
or the seventh may prove fatal. 
Further if the Moon, Mercury, Venus or Jupiter owns the 
seventh house his Maraka, — the death inflicting — powers are 
enhanced, and particularly so if the planet tenants a Maraka 
house, i.e., the seventh or the second. 
284 
Under the above circumstances, the four planets Moon, Mercury, 
Venus and Jupiter are stronger for the worse in increasing order. 
Mercury is more fatal than the Moon, Venus more fatal than 
Mercury and Jupiter most fatal of them all. 
The Parashari system enumerates on the basis of the above 
dictum certain planets as good and the others evil on the 'basis 
of the sign rising or the ascendant in a particular chart. 
(H) If the sign rising is: 
(I) Aries: Saturn, Mercury and Venus are Papas, Jupiter and 
Sun are Shubhas. Mere Sambandha between Jupiter and Saturn 
does not confer Raja Yoga here, because Jupiter is the lord of 
the twelfth also, and Saturn the lord of the eleventh also, they 
yield evil results in addition to conferring good results. Venus 
is a full killer (extremely fatal) and a Maraka. Saturn and other 
Papas have also the power to kill. 
(ii) Taurus: Jupiter, Venus and the Moon are Papas. Saturn 
and the Sun are Shubhas. Saturn alone is Raja Yoga Karaka. 
Papa planets —Jupiter, Venus, the Moon and Mercury have 
attributes of Maraka (death inflicting propensities). 
(Hi) Gemini: Mars. Jupiter and the Sun are Papas; Venus 
alone is Shubha. Mere Sambandha between Jupiter and Saturn 
does not confer a Raja Yoga, here Jupiter is the lord of the 
seventh house also and Saturn the lord of the eighth also. A com- 
bination of Mercury and Venus confers Raja Yoga. If the Moon 
is not conjoined with Papa, he does not prove fatal during his 
Mahadasha. 
(iv) Cancer: Venus and Mercury are Papas. Mars and Jupiter 
are Shubhas. Only Mars is Raja .Yoga Karaka. Saturn alone is 
the killer. Other planets have Maraka propensities only. 
(v) Leo: Mercury and Venus are Papas; only Mars is Shubha. 
No Raja Yoga is conferred by Sambandha of Venus and Jupiter 
only. Mercury, etc., having Maraka propensities kill the native. 
(vi) Virgo: Mars, Jupiter and Moon are Papas. Venus alone 
is Shubha. Sambandha between Mercury and Venus causes good 
Raja Yoga. Venus is a killer; others, Mars etc., are Marakas. 
(vii) Libra: Jupiter, the Sun and Mars are Papas. Saturn and 
Mercury are Shubhas. A Sambandha between the Moon and 
Mercury causes Raja Yoga. Mars kills; Jupiter, etc., have Maraka 
propensities and are also killers. 
(viii) Scorpio: Mercury, Mars and Venus are Papas. Jupiter 
285 
and Moon are Shubhas. A Sambandha between the Sun and the 
Moon causes Raja Yoga. Jupiter is the killer; Mercury, etc., have 
also Maraka propensities and are killers. 
(ix) Sagittarius: Venus alone is a Papa. Mercury and the. 
Sun are Shubhas. Sambandha between Mercury and Sun gives 
rise to Raja Yoga. Saturn is the killer. Papas like Venus, etc.. 
have Maraka propensities and are killers also. 
(x) Capricorn: Mars. Jupiter and the Moon are Papas. Venus 
and Mercury are Shubhas. Mars, etc., may prove fatal during their 
Mahadasha or Antardasha because they have Maraka propensi- 
ties. Venus alone causes good Yoga. 
(xi) Aquarius: Jupiter, the Moon and Mars are Papas. Venus 
alone is Shubha. Sambandha between Mars and Venus gives rise 
to Raja Yoga. Jupiter is the killer. Also Mars. etc.. have Maraka 
propensities. 
(xii) Pisces: Saturn. Venus and the Sun are Papas. Mars and 
the Moon are Shubhas. Sambandha between Jupiter and Mars 
confers Raja Yoga. Mercury and Saturn yield Maraka results 
during their Mahadashas and Antardashas. 
A brief outline has been furnished above of the way of look- 
ing at lords of houses. But the ancient text does not specify the 
lord of each house for each ascendant. We, have, however, 
discussed at length earlier the criteria for determining whether 
the lord of a particular house should be deemed a Shubha or 
a Papa. 
In giving above a faithful translation of the Sanskrit text, we 
have not added that a Shubha planet confers good and benefit 
results during his Mahadasha or Antardasha and a Papa yields 
evil results during his periods, because that is understood: we 
are dealing in this chapter with the effects of Mahadashas and 
naturally any topic dealt herein pertains to Mahadashas. 
Certain further explanations are, however, necessary at this 
stage. 
For Scorpio ascendant, the text states that Jupiter is a Shubha 
and further on we find stated that Jupiter is a killer. A doubt may 
naturally arise. Are these two statements mutually contradictory? 
No. because the author intends to convey that Jupiter being 
lord of the second and the fifth will show good results during 
his Mahadasha and Antardasha. but if the Jupiter's Mahadasha 
commences or continues, when according to the rules determining 
286 
longevity, the native's life term is about to be over, then 
Jupiter inflicts death. So, a planet may play a dual role, because 
he is the lord of two houses, one of which, i. e., the fifth, is 
absolutely good on account of being a trine, but the other, the 
second, is a giver of wealth as well as a killer. Thus, where a 
planet has two traits of character, one good and one evil, both 
of these have been stated and there is no contradiction. Similarly, 
under Virgo, we find Venus stated as a Shubha due to the lord- 
ship of the ninth and also a killer due to lordship of the second, 
and so on. If the time of death is not ripe, such a planet will 
give good results in regard to wealth and prosperity. 
Planets which have been described as Papas may cause illness, 
but if placed in their own house (except lord of the second in 
the second, lord of the seventh in the seventh), they will confer 
good results pertaining to the house they own and occupy. For 
example, the lord of the eleventh is a Papi, but if he is in the 
eleventh, he will in regard to income and finances bestow very 
good results during his Mahadasha. 
(I) So far we have discussed the lords of the various houses 
which cover the seven planets. Now we shall provide some rules 
in regard to judging the Mahadashas of Rahu and Ketu. 
(i) Rahu and Ketu produce effects as determined by the house 
they tenant. For example, if Rahu tenants a trine or an angle 
or the eleventh, he will give good results, though in the seventh, 
he will have Maraka propensities as well. Rahu in the second or 
the twelfth, if afflicted, may cause loss of wealth during his 
Mahadasha; so also Rahu in the eighth. Rahu in the third and 
the sixth would increase valour and activities of the native. So 
with Ketu. Look to the effects described for planets in the 
different signs and houses as given in Chapters 8 and 9. 
(ii) Rahu and Ketu also reflect during their Mahadashas the 
effects of the planets they are conjoined with. Suppose for a Cancer 
ascendant Mars is in the third and Rahu in Virgo conjoined with 
Mars; Rahu will reflect the effects of Mars also. In other words. 
Rahu will produce all such effects as can be bestowed by Mars. 
Suppose for the Leo ascendant Saturn and Rahu are conjoined in 
the ninth in Aries; then Rahu will produce effects of the ninth 
house and of Saturn as well 
(iii) One of the schools of Hindu astrology interprets the 
Sanskrit text as meaning that Rahu or Ketu also bestow the 
287 
effects of the dispositor*. For example, if Rahu is in Aries, he 
•will reflect during his Mahadasha the effects of Mars as well; 
suppose Rahu is in Taurus, then he will reflect the effects of 
Venus as well, and so on. We, however, do not accept this view, 
but confine ourselves only to (i) and (ii) above. 
(iv) If Rahu or Ketu is in an angle and conjoined with the 
lord of a trine, it is an excellent Raja Yoga and Rahu or Ketu 
so conjoined will cause Raja Yoga results during his Mahadasha 
or Antardasha. 
(v) Similarly, if Rahu or Ketu occupies a trine and is conjoined 
with the lord of an angle, such Rahu or Ketu so conjoined will 
give rise to Raja Yoga results during his Mahadasha or Antard 
asha. 
(J) We shall now discuss the excellence or otherwise of the 
Mahadashas of the various planets. 
(i) The lord of an angle having a Sambandha with the lord 
of a trine, bestows very good results. Thus it follows that the lord 
of a trine if conjoined with the lord of an angle will also confer 
excellent results. 
(ii) The above Sambandha of the lords of an angle or trine 
bestows very good results if not diluted by Sambandha with the 
lord of an evil house. For example, if the lord of an angle and 
a trine form simultaneously a Sambandha with the lord of the 
third, the sixth, the eighth or the eleventh, the efficacy in regard 
to good results is marred in some measure. 
(iii) If the lords of a trine or an angle themselves have some 
Dosha, notwithstanding such Dosha they become stronger for 
the good and confer good results during their Mahadashas. Of 
course, the Dosha will be a pulling down weigh and the result can- 
not be so good as it would have been if there had been no Dosha. 
(iv) (a) As stated earlier if the lord of an angle has Sambandha 
with the lord of a trine, he would confer good results during his 
Mahadasha. If the lord of the angle has Sambandha with both 
the trine lords, his Mahadashawill be still better. 
(b) Similarly, if the lord of a trine, has Sambandha with the 
lord of one angle, it is good; if with lords of two angles; it is 
* The word dispositor means the planet, who owns the sign 
in which another planet is. For example, if the Sun is in Scorpio — 
then Mars lord of Scorpio is the dispositor of the Sun. This is a technical 
term used in astrology. 
288 
better; if with the lords of three angles, it would be still better, 
and if with the lords of all the four angles, it would be the best 
placement for conferring excellent results. 
(c) While evaluating (a) and (b) above, it should be kept in 
Mind that the ninth lord is more powerful than the fifth lord 
and among the lords of the first, fourth, seventh and the tenth, 
the latter is stronger than the former. 
Oil it follows that the ninth lord in the tenth and the tenth 
lord in the ninth Or both together in the ninth or the tenth or 
even the lord of the ninth in the ninth and the lord of the tenth 
in the tenth would confer excellent results during their Maha- 
dashas. 
To appraise how far the Sambandha between the lord of an 
angle and trine will be devalued due to Sambandha with lords 
of undesirable houses, readers are referred to Kendra — Trikona 
Yogas in Chapter 11. 
(K) It is now necessary to deal with the question as to which 
Mahadasha is capable of causing death. We would state in this 
context that the determination of the time of death is a very 
complicated issue which bristles with difficulties and we would 
advise beginners not to predict death. It requires a life-time of 
experience and a study of more detailed rules to determine 
death than can possibly be given in a simple book on astrology 
such as this, which merely provides an outline of the subject. The 
prediction regarding death creates a fear and horror in the mind 
of the native; besides it creates a very unfavourable chain of 
adverse psychological repercussions. 
Moreover, a Maraka planet at times does not actually it 
may make the native seriously ill or he may be disgraced or 
thrown out of his job, or involved in a civil or criminal case with 
evil consequences, or his finances may be appreciably depleted 
and so on. 
The general rule is that the lords of the second and the seventh 
houses are Marakas. but as we had occasion to examine earlier. 
Jupiter is Shubha as well as Maraka for Scorpio ascendants. 
Venus is Shubha as well as Maraka for Virgo ascendants, and 
so on. Now if the native is destined to live long and the Mahadasha 
of Jupiter or Venus runs during youth or middle age they will 
only prove Shubha and not Maraka. The crucial point to decide 
is whether a particular native has a short, medium or long life 
289 
and* which Mahadasha synchronises with the probable period of 
death. If the Mahadasha so synchronising has been described as 
Maraka, it will kill the native. To sum up, the following Maha- 
dashas are capable of proving fatal : 
(i) Lord of the second 
(ii) Lord of the seventh 
(iii) Planets in the second or the seventh 
(iv) Papis conjoined with the lord of the second or the seventh 
(v) Lord of the twelfth 
(vi) Lord of the eighth 
(vii) If no Mahadasha of any of the above synchronises with 
the expected period of death, then in the Mahadasha of 
a Papa 
(viii) Saturn having Sambandha with Marakas. Generally 
Saturn in the above circumstances has priority over other 
planets in causing death. 
Having discussed the Parashari system, we shall now pass on 
to the fourth stream. We have stated earlier that in the matter 
of judgment of a Mahadasha, four parallel streams flow side by 
side in the same channel and a judicious conclusion has to be 
arrived at after taking into consideration the various points 
discussed under each head. We shall now deal with the fourth 
stream which does not enunciate a new code or school, but 
under this we have grouped the various general principles for 
evaluation of the Mahadasha, as stated in various ancient texts. 
D. OTHER FACTORS FOR EVALUATING THE 
EFFECTS OF A MAHADASHA 
(i) If a planet is exalted, his Mahadasha will be very good 
provided he occupies a good house. It may be stated that of the 
two positions, (i) weak by sign but placement in a good house, 
such as the eleventh, and (ii) good by sign position but placement 
in an evil house, such as the eighth, the former is better if we 
have to choose between the two evils. 
(ii) A planet in his own house is always expected to yield 
good results in his Mahadasha. If the house occupied is also a 
290 
good one, the results would be still better. 
(ill) A planet in great friend's house shows during his Maha- 
dasha benefit from friends or through the agency or patronage of 
friends. 
(iv) A planet in a friend's sign will show good results and 
benefit due to the assistance of friends, but not in the same mea- 
sure as in (iii) above. 
(v) A planet occupying a neutral's house, maintains the status 
quo neither augmenting his fortunes nor scaling them down. 
(vi) A planet occupying his enemy's house causes various kinds 
of opposition and impediments during his Mahadasha. 
(vii) A planet occupying his great enemy's sign causes during 
his Mahadasha all the ill effects stated in (vi) above, but with 
greater intensity and rigour. 
(viii) A planet debilitated in sign unless occupying special 
degrees as mentioned for each planet in Chapter 8, causes during 
his Mahadasha, intense distress. If the planet is retrograde also, 
he is not so evil. 
(ix) A combust planet, if otherwise good, is incapable of bring- 
ing about during his Mahadasha, fully good effects. A combust 
planet, if a malefic and prone to cause ill effects, causes during 
his Mahadashamuch distress. 
(x) Planets which have crossed their deepest debilitation points 
and are proceeding towards their highest exaltation points show 
good results; while those which have crossed their highest exalta- 
tion points and are proceeding towards their deepest debilitation 
points show adverse results during their respective Mahadashas. 
(xi) A retrograde planet if benefic becomes stronger to do good 
and his Mahadasha is good. The reverse is the cause with male- 
fics in retrogression. 
(xii) When a malefic and a benefic together conjoin, the malefic 
would yield better results than if he were not so conjoined. But 
the benefic is sullied due to conjunction with a malefic and does 
not yield during his Mahadasha, such results as he would have 
done otherwise. 
(xiii) Similar to (xii) above is the case when a planet in 
exaltation is in conjunction with a planet in debilitation. For 
example, if, Mars and Jupiter both occupy Cancer, under such 
circumstances, the effects of Mars Mahadasha are improved, but 
those of Jupiter arc devalued. 
291 
(xiv) A planet in a sign rising with its hind parts first* becomes 
more malefic than he is otherwise; while a planet in a sign with 
the front portion* rising becomes more benefic than he would 
have been. Thus they yield effects during their Mahadashas 
accordingly. 
(xv) Planets if in movable signs cause much movement and 
travelling during their Dashas, while planets in fixed signs curtail 
movement and travelling In some measure. In common signs, this 
special effect is not so marked. 
(xvi) Signs correspond to houses. Aries would correspond to 
the first house. Taurus to the second, and so on. A planet in a 
sign would confer during his Mahadasha the effects as modified 
by this factor. For example, a benefic in Taurus may during his 
Mahadasha cause acquisition of money; a malefic therein may 
give rise to complaints of the throat or eyes. 
(xvii) Planets in signs with the hind parts rising may show 
their full effect during the latter part of the Mahadasha; a 
planet in Pisces in the middle one-third of the Mahadasha; and a 
planet in a sign rising with the front part first, in the initial 
period of the Mahadasha. 
(xviii) Another rule for judging when the effect of a planet, 
good or evil, will be felt in an intense manner is to examine 
whether the planet is in (a) the first ten degrees, (b) the middle 
ten degrees, or (c) the last ten degrees of the sign. If in (a), the 
intense effects would be felt during the initial period of the Maha- 
dasha; if in (b), during the middle period: if in (c). during the 
last one-third part of the Mahadasha. 
(xix) It is frequently observed that a Mahadasha proves good 
for certain matters but evil for others. For example, a person may 
during the course of Mahadasha rise in his career, but suffer the 
loss of a son. Therefore, while assessing a Mahadasha for general 
effects, its effect for each house should also be appraised. For this 
the following guide lines will prove useful. 
(a) A weak planet, particularly if he is a malefic, will during 
his Mahadasha annihilate (i) the house from which he is placed 
in the twelfth, and also, (ii) the house as counted from which 
he is the twelfth lord. For example, if a weak malefic is in the 
fourth, then because he is in the twelfth from the fifth, he will 
*See Chapter 5 on signs. 
292 
be detrimental for fifth house matters and affairs. This is an 
illustration of (i) above. Now let us take another example to 
illustrate (ii) above. Suppose a weak lord of the ninth is located 
anywhere in the chart. Then because the ninth is the twelfth from 
the tenth, the tenth house affairs will suffer. 
What has been stated in regard to a planet tenanting the 
twelfth from a house, or being the lord of the twelfth from a 
house, should also be applied if he is in the sixth or eighth from 
a house or lord of the sixth or the eighth from a particular house. 
(b) A strong and well-placed planet will during his Mahadasha 
augment the affairs of (i) the house from which he is in the 
eleventh, and (ii) the house as counted from which he is the 
lord of the eleventh. Let us illustrate; a strong and good planet 
in the second will promote the fourth house affairs because the 
second house is the eleventh from the fourth. This is an illustra- 
tion of (i) above. Now let us illustrate (ii) above. The lord of the 
second if strong and well placed anywhere will promote the 
affairs of the fourth house because he is the lord of the eleventh 
from the fourth. 
(xx) The Mahadasha stretches over a long span of years -- 
Jupiter extends to 16 years, Saturn to 19 years, and so on. When 
a Mahadasha is current find out which natal house in the birth 
chart he is transiting. If he is strong radically, when during the 
Mahadasha he transits a good sign, exalted, own or great friend's 
and a good house in the natal chart, he will confer good results. 
For example, suppose a native with Scorpio ascendant has 
Jupiter's Mahadasha, and Jupiter is placed in Pisces in the fifth 
house, i.e., well placed by sign, and in the fifth house in the 
radix; now when during Jupiter's Mahadasha, Jupiter transits 
Cancer, his sign of exaltation and also the ninth house in the 
radix during that one year, he will confer excellent results. Now 
take the reverse case. Suppose in a birth chart with Cancer 
ascendant, Saturn is in the twelfth and Saturn's Mahadasha is 
current. When by transit he is in Aries in the tenth, he will spoil 
the tenth house affairs because he will be transiting his sign of 
debilitation. 
(xxi) When the Mahadasha of a planet is current and he is 
combust, he shows evil effects during his period of combustion. 
Similarly, when the MahadashalorA gets conjoined with a malefic 
or is aspected by a malefic during the course of his Mahadasha, 
293 
he shows evil results. But when his Mahadashais current and 
he becomes conjoined with a benefic or is aspected by a benefic, 
he produces good results. 
(xxii) Apply all the general principles stated in Chapter 10 
and also those discussed in Chapter 12 and apply them to Maha- 
dashas. For example, a malefic in the third may during his 
Mahadasha increase the personal courage or valour of the native, 
but may be evil for his brother's health (third house governing 
brothers) and also for the mother (twelfth from fourth; expendi- 
ture for the vitality of mother—fourth). Or take another example. 
A planet in the eleventh may be good for the native's own in- 
come, but may prove detrimental to the native's father (second 
from tenth: Maraka for father). 
What has been stated in respect of location in the eleventh 
from a house or being lord of the eleventh from a house, should 
also be applied where a planet is lord of the second, fourth, ninth, 
or the tenth as counted from any house or located in the second, 
fourth, ninth or 'I:: tenth from a particular house. 
(xxiii) In judging a Mahadasha, if most of the planets are in 
the sixth or the eighth from the Mahadasha lord, the Dasha will 
not be good; but if the benefics are in the first, fourth, fifth, 
seventh, ninth, or the tenth and benefics or malefics in the 11th 
from him, the Mahadasha will be good. 
(xxiv) The Mahadasha of a planet is unfavourable for those 
houses whose lords are the Mahadasha lord's enemies, and 
particularly so, if the two lords are in quincunx.* To illustrate 
this, suppose Leo is the sign rising. The sign is owned by the 
Sun. Now Saturn is an ememy of the Sun, so Saturn's Mahadasha 
would be detrimental for the matters and affairs governed by the 
first house. This will be particularly so if the Sun and Saturn are 
in quincunx. 
Space does not permit stating all the subtleties and niceties 
which should be applied to determine whether a planet's Maha-d 
ashas would be good and if good in what respects; or evil and 
if evil in which particulars; but the above discussions will help 
to develop a sense of discrimination and that is ultimately the 
most important factor which helps in determining the good and 
evil effects of a planet exercised and, felt during his Mahadasha. 
* Quincunx : Sixth and eighth from each other. 
CHAPTER 
ANTARDASHAS (Minor Periods) 
the principles and rules laid down for determining the qualities, 
the goodness or badness of Mahadashas should also be applied to 
Antardashas. We have in Chapter 14 referred to four parallel 
streams running in one channel and all the four streams apply to 
Antardashas also. It is therefore unnecessary to repeat the 
same principles in relation to Antardashas as we have stated 
earlier in regard to the evaluation of Mahadashas. 
1. The first principle, therefore, is that if the Mahadasha of a 
particular planet due to his strength, placement in sign and 
house, ownership of house or houses or due to conjunction with 
benefics, lords of good houses or due to receiving aspect from 
them is good, his Antardasha will also be good. Conversely 
if on the various counts enumerated above, the Mahadasha is 
evil, then his Antardasha will also be evil. 
2. (a) If the Mahadasha is good and the Antardasha also 
appears to be good, very good effects will be felt; (b) if the 
Mahadasha is evil, even a good Antardasha will not be able to 
affect affairs so favourably; but there will be a slight improve- 
ment in the status and partial good effects will be felt, (c) if the 
Mahadasha is evil and the Antardasha also evil, then extremely 
evil effects will be felt; (d) if the Mahadasha is good and the 
Antardasha evil, the general trend of goodness will be arrested, 
just like the Sun who is eclipsed for the time being and during 
295 
the currency of evil.Antardasha, there will be impediments and 
difficulties, opposition and setbacks, but the basic structure of 
progress will not suffer any serious damage. 
In this connection readers are requested, not to overlook the 
radix or the birth chart. When the foundation is strong, a 
tempest may shake the branches of a tree but will not uproot it. 
Similarly, when the Mahadasha is strong, an Antardasha may 
affect the blossoming of the tree or drying up of the leaves of 
the tree, according as it is good or bad, but does not uproot the 
tree. 
3. The location of the Antardasha lord, as counted from the 
Mahadasha lord is also an important factor. If the Antardasha 
lord is in the sixth, eighth or the twelfth from the Mahadasha 
lord, it is evil, but if the Antardasha lord is in trine or an angle 
or in the eleventh or in the second or the third or conjoined with 
the Mahadasha lord, it is good. The conjunction of the Mahadasha 
and the Antardasha lords would intensify the effects and if both 
are evil, as judged by the principles elaborated in Chapter 14 
their conjunction would intensify the evil effects. 
4. The mutual relationship between the Mahadasha lord and 
the Antardasha lord is another important factor. If they are 
enemies, despite both being good independently, the Antardasha 
will not be so good. If they are friends the Antardasha will be 
better. But if as adjudged separately both are evil and happen to , 
be enemies also, the Antardasha will prove very evil. 
5. The Antardasha of a benefic in the Mahadasha of a benefic 
is generally good, but the Antardasha of a Papa in the Maha- 
dasha of a Papa is very evil. For example, Rahu in Mars or Mars 
in Rahu, Saturn in Rahu or Rahu in Saturn, Mars in Saturn or 
Saturn in Mars, produce evil results. 
Antardashas in Evil Mahadashas 
6. On a similar principle, the Antardasha of the lord of an 
evil house in the Mahadasha of the lord of an evil house is 
considered evil. On this principle, if the Mahadasha and the 
Antardasha lords are both afflicted the following Antardashas 
prove very evil for health and may even cause death, if occurring 
at the appropriate time : 
(i) In the Mahadasha of the lord of the eighth Antardashas of ( 
a) lord of the sixth, (b) of a Papa tenanting the sixth house, 
296 
(c) a planet conjoined with the lord of the sixth, (d) a planet 
aspected by the lord of the eighth. 
(ii) In the Mahadashaof a Papi (natural malefic) posited in the 
eighth house, the Antardashas of (a) lord of the sixth, (b) a Papa 
tenanting the sixth house. 
(hi) In the Mahadasha of the lord of the sixth, the Antardashas 
of (a) lord of the eighth, (b) a planet occupying the eighth house. 
(iv) In the Mahadashaof a Papa'm the sixth, the Antardashas of 
(a) the lord of the eighth, even if the lord of the eighth is in the 
eighth. 
(v) In the Mahadasha of the lord of the twelfth, the Antar- 
dashas of (a) the lord of the second, (b) a planet conjoined with 
the lord of the second, (c) a planet fully aspected by the lord of 
the second, (d) a Papa tenanting the twelfth house, (e) a Papa 
conjoined with the lord of the twelfth in the second. 
(vi) In the Mahadasha of a Papa tenanting the twelfth house, 
the Antardasha of (a) Papa having Sambandha with the lord 
of the second. 
(vii) In the Mahadasha of the lord of second, the Antardasha 
of (a) lord of twelfth (b) a planet in twelfth and aspected by the 
lord of the twelfth. 
Shubhas and Papas According to Parashari 
7. Another school of Hindu astrologers states that in the 
Mahadasha of one of the following, the Antardasha of another 
may prove fatal if occurring at the appropriate stage of life, as 
determined by the rules given in Chapter 12. 
(a) Lord of the second house, (b) Papa tenanting the second 
house, (c) lord of the seventh house, (d) a Papa tenanting the 
seventh house, (e) a Papa conjoined with the lord of the second 
house, (f) a Papa conjoined with the lord of the seventh house, ( 
g) lord of the eighth, (h) lord of third or the eighth if conjoined 
with the lord of the second or the seventh, (i) Saturn conjoined 
with a Maraka, (j) lord of the sixth, (k) the weakest planet in 
the birth chart. 
8. A planet who is a Maraka and whose Mahadasha is current 
does not kill during the Antardasha of a Shubha (lord of the 
fifth or the ninth) although such a Shubha may have Sambandha 
with the Mahadasha lord, who is a Maraka. 
9. A planet who is a Maraka and whose Mahadashais current 
297 
kills in the Antardasha of a Papa, according to ownership, even 
though such a Papa may have no Sambandha with the Mahadasha 
lord, who is a Maraka. 
10. A Maraka planet during his Mahadasha does not confer 
wealth and in a good Antardasha even, there is no gain of money, 
but only increase in respect. 
11. If there is Mahadasha of a Papa that is lord of the third, 
sixth, eleventh or the eighth, then the Antardasha of Shubha 
which does not have Sambandha with the Mahadasha lord, gives 
Papa results; the Antardashas of Shubhas, who have Sambandha 
with the Mahadasha bestow mixed results and the Antardasha 
of a Yoga Karaka Shubha who does not have Sambandha with 
the Mahadashalord gives extremely Papa results. 
Antardashas of Lords of Trine and Angles 
12. The lord of a trine, if he has Sambandha with the lord of the 
angle, will show good results in his Antardasha in the Mahadasha 
of the lord of an angle. Thus (a) Antardasha of the lord of the 
fifth in the Mahadashas of (i) lord of first, (ii) lord of fourth, ( 
iii) lord of seventh, and (iv) lord of the tenth, will show good 
results. And (b) the Antardasha of the lord of the ninth will show 
good results in the Mahadasha of (i) lord of the first, (ii) lord of 
the fourth, (iii) lord of the seventh, (iv) lord of the tenth. 
13. The lord of an angle will, if he has Sambandha with the 
lord of the trine, show good results in his Antardasha in the 
Mahadasha of the lord of the trine. Thus the Antardasha of (a) 
lord of the first in the Mahadasha of (i) lord of fifth, (ii) or 
lord of the ninth, and (b) lord of the fourth in the Mahadasha 
of (i) lord of fifth (ii) lord of the ninth, also (c) lord of seventh 
in the Mahadasha of (i) lord of the fifth, (ii) lord of the ninth, and ( 
d) lord of the tenth in the Mahadasha of (i) lord of the fifth, 
and (ii) lord of the ninth will be good. 
14. In (12) and (13) above, it is necessary that there be 
Sambandha between the Mahadasha lord and the Antardasha lord. 
If there is no Sambandha, the result will not be good; that is, the 
Antardasha of a trine lord in the Mahadasha of the lord of an 
angle or the Antardasha of the lord of an angle in the Mahadasha 
of the lord of the trine will not be good and particularly so, if the 
lord owns an evil house in addition to the lordship of trine or an 
angle. 
298 
15. The ascendant is both an angle as well as a trine. There- 
fore, if the lord of the ascendant has Sambandha with the lord 
of the fifth or the ninth house, this should be treated as 
Sambandha between the lords of an angle (ascendant) and thine ( 
fifth or ninth). Similarly, if the lord of the ascendant' has 
Sambandha with the lord of an angle (fourth, seventh or tenth), 
it should be treated as Sambandha between the lord of a trine ( 
ascendant) with the lord of an angle (fourth, seventh or tenth). 
Thus during the Mahadasha of the lord of the ascendant, if he 
has Sambandha with the lords of any of the following, he will 
bestow good effects during the Antardasha of the planet with 
whom he has Sambandha: 
Lord of (i) fourth, (ii) fifth, (iii) seventh, (iv) ninth, or (v) 
tenth. Similarly, during the Mahadasha of the lord of (i) fourth, ( 
ii) fifth, (iii) seventh, (iv) ninth, or (v) tenth, if the lord of the 
ascendant has Sambandha with the lord of the Mahadasha of 
above, then during the Antardasha of the ascendant lord, there 
will be rise and prosperity. 
16. The effect of Shubhas' (lord of the fifth or the ninth) 
Antardasha is good, if the Antardasha lord has Sambandha with 
the Mahadashalord. 
17. In the Mahadasha of a strong lord of the tenth or the 
ninth, even Shubha planets, having no Sambandha with the 
Mahadashalord, bestow good results. 
Antardasha in Own Mahadasha 
18. A Mahadasha lord does not show his full good or evil 
effects in his own Antardasha. Readers are reminded that a 
Mahadasha has nine Antardashas, the first Antardasha being his 
own. Now as soon as the Mahadasha commences, the general 
trend and tenor of the native's life and career will change in 
keeping with the traits and effects of the planet whose Mahadasha 
commences. But the full effect will not be felt in his own. 
Antardasha. It will only become full in the Antardashas of 
Sadharmi and Sambandhi planets. 
(i) Sadharmi means planets having a similar disposition : (a) 
lords of angles are Sadharmi of one another; (b) lords of trine 
are Sadharmi one in respect of the other; (c) the lords of the 
third, sixth and the eleventh form a group by themselves and 
are mutually Sadharmi; (d) lord of the eighth stands by himself. 
299 
This is one way to classify planets into four groups, each mem- 
ber of one group being Sadharmi of the other members of the 
same group. Here we have enumerated lords of ten houses and 
grouped them, but the lords of second and the twelfth have 
been left out. The Sun and the Moon own one house each. 
If the luminary is lord of the second or the twelfth and is con- 
joined with a planet, the luminary will be classed with the 
conjoined planet, according to the ownership of such planet. For 
example, if the luminary is conjoined with the lord of an angle, 
he will .go to group (a); if conjoined with the lord of a trine, he 
will go to group (b); if conjoined with the lord of the third, sixth 
or the eleventh, he will be classed in group (c); and if conjoined 
with the lord of the eighth, he will be placed in group (d). 
But if the luminary — the Sun or the Moon, is lord of the 
second or the twelfth and is not conjoined with any other planet, 
he would be grouped under (a), (b), (c) or (d), according as he 
occupies an angle, trine, etc. 
Planets other than the Sun and the Moon own two houses each. 
And a planet lord of the second or the twelfth will fall in group ( 
a), (b), (c) or (d), according to the ownership of the other house. 
This is one definition of Sadharmi, meaning having similar dis- 
position. Another way of demarcating planets into Sadharmi 
groups is as follows : members of the following one group are 
Sadharmi of each other : 
(i) The lords of the first and the seventh 
(ii) The lords of the second and the twelfth 
(iii) The lords of the third and the eleventh 
(iv) The lords of the fourth and the tenth 
(v) The lords of the fifth and the ninth 
(vi) The lords of the sixth and the eighth 
We have explained at length what the Sanskrit word Sadharmi 
means. Sambandhi, means, planets having Sambandha. We have 
explained already in Chapter 10 what a Sambandha is between 
two planets, so we shall not repeat ourselves here. One of the 
general principles is that a Mahadasha lord shows the impact of 
his influence in the Antardasha of a Sadharmi or Sambandhi 
planet. If the Antardasha lord is neither a Sadharmi nor a Sam- 
bandhi of the Mahadashalovd, his trend would not be the same 
300 
or similar but of a contrary nature. Under such circumstance, the 
reader has to exercise his individual judgment as to which would 
prevail over the other. When the Mahadasha lord and the Antar- 
dasha lord have contrary trends and they are neither Sambandhis 
nor Sadharmis, if the Mahadasha lord is overwhelmingly strong 
his effects would prevail; but if the Antardasha lord is extra 
powerful, his influence would predominate. Each planet has to 
be determined on his own merit and no hard and fast rule can be 
laid down as to which of the two contrary influences would 
prevail. 
Sometimes it happens that the influence of the Mahadasha lord 
and the Antardasha lord, both of contrary nature, show their 
effects in different spheres. For example, the native may have a 
strong Mahadasha for political career, high office and position. 
Due to the general strength of the birth chart and potency of the 
Mahadasha lord, the native continues to be at the helm of affairs 
even during adverse Antardashas. But during an adverse Antar- 
dasha, health may suffer or one of the family members may die 
or even his political image be blurred, but not completely broken. 
Nehru continued to be the Prime Minister of India from 1947 to 
1964. But during this period he suffered from paralytic stroke, he 
lost his only son-in-law and in 1962 when China invaded India 
and routed the Indian army, his prestige as a political leader 
suffered a serious set-back. Thus we come across long periods 
of time in the lives of an individual when he appears to be at the 
zenith of his life, but suffers during intermittent periods from 
domestic or health troubles. What is intended to convey is that 
the Mahadasha lord and Antardasha lord at times may show 
contrary effects but in different spheres or on different planes. 
19. Saturn and Venus have a special feature, whether there 
be Sambandha between these two planets or not : (i) Saturn in 
his Mahadasha shows his effect during the Antardasha of Venus, 
and (ii) Venus in his Mahadasha shows his effect during the Antar- 
dasha of Saturn. 
Antardashas in Yoga Karaka's Mahadasha: 
20. The Yoga Karaka planet is considered extremely good 
and powerful. A lord of a trine and a lord of an angle get addition- 
al power due to Sambandha with each other. Without such Sam- 
bandha, by their individual selves alone, they will not be capable 
301 
of producing a third independent force. This third entity, quality, 
power or force can be produced by their Sambandha alone. In 
Hindu astrology, the angle has been treated as a male and a trine 
as a female. When a male house lord has Sambandha with a female 
house lord, a third entity a child — may be produced; but if the 
male and the female are isolated from each other,, there cannot 
be a progeny. But a Yoga Karaka planet being lord of a trine 
and an angle combines in himself the attributes of a male and a 
female and therefore he does not need Sambandha with an 
outsider like the lord of a trine or angle. So the Yoga Karaka 
planet is in a distinctive class by himself. 
21. In the Mahadasha of Yoga Karaka, the Antardashas of 
Rahu or Ketu if the node tenants an angle or trine, gives good 
effects. 
22. In the Mahadasha of Yoga Karaka, (i) when there is An tar- 
das ha of a Shubha due to ownership, having Sambandha with 
Mahadasha lord, extremely good results are experienced; (ii) 
but in 'the above Mahadasha, if the lord is a Shubha (lord of good 
houses), and has no Sambandha, then instead of extremely good 
results, fairly good effects only are felt. 
23. Even Papas having Sambandha with the Yoga Karaka 
will due to their Sambandha, give good effects during their Antar- 
dashas. 
The inherent power of the Yoga Karaka has been demonstrated 
here. There would be three grades of influences; (i) a Shubha- 
Antardasha having Sambandha with Yoga Karaka is extremely 
good; (ii) a Shubha having no Sambandha with Mahadashalord 
is fairly good; (iii) a Papa having Sambandha with Yoga Karaka 
is ordinarily good. 
Antardashas of Yoga Karaka: 
24. The effects of the Antardasha of a Yoga Karaka planet 
are good even if he has no Sambandha with the Shubha Mahadasha 
lord. If the Yoga Karaka (Antardasha lord) has Sambandha with 
the Shubha by ownership whose Mahadasha is current, the Yoga 
Karaka sometimes bestows very good results due to his being the 
Yoga Karaka. It is necessary to explain the term Yoga Karaka. 
When one and the same planet is the lord of a trine and angle, 
he is called Yoga Karaka. For example, for Cancer ascendant 
Mars owns the fifth (trine) and tenth (an angle) and is a Yoga 
302 
Karaka; for Leo also he is a Yoga Karaka because he owns the 
fourth (an angle) and ninth (a trine); for Taurus, Saturn owns the 
ninth (a trine) and the tenth (angle) and is hence a Yoga Karaka. 
For similar reasons, Saturn is Yoga Karaka for Libra ascendant 
and Venus for Capricorn and Aquarius ascendants. The term Yoga 
Karaka has been defined earlier, but is being re-explained here 
for immediate reference. 
Two New Points of View: 
We are in this judgment of the Antardashas introducing two 
new elements, which too have to be taken into account. 
25. Consider that house as the ascendant, which is occupied 
by the Mahadasha lord and from this position count the houses 
which are first, second, third, and so on, and see which house or 
houses are owned by the Antardasha lord. He will bestow the 
effect of these houses during his Antardasha. 
Illustration: Suppose Leo is the ascendant and Mars is in 
Scorpio in the fourth. The Mahadasha of Mars is current. Now 
suppose we have to judge the effect of Saturn's Antardasha. Then 
because Saturn is the lord of Capricorn and Aquarius and as 
Capricorn will be the third and Aquarius the fourth from Scorpio 
where Mars is natally posited, Saturn therefore would during his 
Antardasha in Mars give the effect of lordship of the third and the 
fourth also; this is because he is the ruler of the third and the 
fourth as counted from the Mahadasha lord. This does not mean 
that Saturn will not produce the effect of lordship of the sixth 
and the seventh from the natal ascendant Leo. It only means 
that in addition to the lordship of houses as counted from the 
natal ascendant the lordship as counted from the Mahadasha 
lord should also be considered as an additional factor. 
26. The next point is that just as we have recommended taking 
into consideration of the lordship of the Antardasha lord as 
counted from the house tenanted by the Mahadasha lord, so also 
we have to take into consideration the tenancy of the Antardasha 
lord as counted from the Mahadasha lord. 
Illustration: For example, in the above illustration, if Leo is 
the ascendant and Mars in Scorpio in the fourth, and his Maha- 
dasha is current, we have to judge the effect of Saturn's Antar- 
dasha therein. Then if Saturn is radically in Virgo, being in 
eleventh from the Mahadasha lord Mars (in Scorpio), he will 
303 
confer gain of money, and if he is radically in Libra, twelfth 
from the Mahadasha lord, he will cause heavy expenditure. This 
influence will show itself during Saturn's Antardasha in the Maha- 
dasha of Mars and will be an additional factor to be taken into 
consideration over and above the general effects of Saturn's 
tenancy radically in Virgo or Libra, as the case may be. 
While discussing these two new points, all references to the 
positions of the Mahadasha lord and the Antardasha lord should 
be considered as in the birth chart and not by transit. 
This chapter dealing with Antardasha effects appears to be 
comparatively short, but in fact, it contains many points for judg- 
ing an Antardasha, because all the principles that have been 
stated in connection with the judgment of a Mahadasha should 
be applied mutatis mutandis to Antardashas also. 
27. Pratyantardashas:ivLSt as a Mahadasha period is divided 
into Antardashas, so also an Antardasha period is divided into 
Praty antardashas. 
In Chapter 13 have been given periods of Antardashas. Refe- 
rence to them would show that the Venus A ntardasha period in 
Venus Mahadashais 3 years 4 months. Now how do we calculate 
the Pratyantar* periods in Venus Antardasha and what will be the 
order of planets in the Pratyantars?Let us take the point of order 
first. 
The first Pratyantaris of the planet in whose Antardasha we 
are calculating the Pratyantar. Thus in the Venus Antardasha, the 
nine Pratyantars, will be Venus, Sun, Moon, Mars, Rahu, Jupiter, 
Saturn, Marcury and Ketu. What will be the order of Pratyantars 
in Saturn's Antar? The order will be Saturn, Mercury, Ketu, 
Venus, Sun, Moon, Mars, Rahu and Jupiter. Thus, the cycle 
remains the same, but the first Pratyantar commences with the 
planet whose Antar we are dividing into Pratyantars. Now what 
will be the duration of each Pratyantar? The Venus Antar in 
Venus Dasha is for 3 years 4 months. 
When the total duration is 120 years Venus gets 20 years 
When the total duration is 1 year Venus gets 20 years 
120 
When the total duration is 3 years 4 months his Pratyantaris 
* For brevity, Mahadasha /.y referred to as Dasha. A maniashaas Antar 
and Praty antardasha as Pratyantar. 
304 
20 x 3Y4M 
120 
= 20 x 10 years. 
120 x 3 
= 6 months 20 days. 
Tables for Pratyantars,m each Antar, are available in the 
market and these are therefore not given in this book. 
Some A ntars are of a very short duration and Pratyantars in 
them will be of still shorter durations. For example, the Antar 
of Sun in the Sun's Dasha is of 3 months 18 days. It will not be 
worthwhile to split it into Pratyantars. 
But when the Antar period covers two or three years, it 
becomes worthwhile to sub-divide it into Pratyantars. Then we 
judge the Pratyantar'm the Antar, as we judge the Antar in the 
Mahadasha and we need not repeat what we have stated in regard 
to judgment of Antars. 
Sometimes it happens that the Dasha is good and the Antar is 
also favourable, but the target is not hit. Suppose Libra is the 
ascendant and Saturn's Dasha is current and Saturn is a Yoga 
Karaka, and Mercury's Antar is going, and he as lord of the 
ninth and the twelfth is harmoniously configurated with Saturn. 
Now Mercury Antar in Saturn Dasha extends to 2 years 
8 months 9 days. This is a long period so we sub-divide the 
period of Antar into nine Pratyantars and fix the time of fruition 
during the Pratyantarof Venus (because he is the lord of the 
ascendant) if he is strong, well placed, and harmoniously con- 
figurated with the lords of Dasha and Antar. or in the Pratyantara 
of the Moon (because he is the lord of the tenth) if he is strong 
in the radix and well configurated with the Dasha and Antar 
lords. 
As sometimes the Antars and at times even Pratyantars extend 
over long periods, we are providing below some hints which will 
help in fixing the time of fruition of the result. 
(1) The Sun shows his effects more prominently on Sundays, 
when the Sun, the Moon or Jupiter transits Leo or Krittika. 
Uttaraphalgunior Uttarashadha Nakshatras. 
(2) The Moon shows his effects more prominently on Mondays 
when the Moon, the Sun or Jupiter transits Cancer or Rohini, 
Hasta or Shravan Nakshatras. 
305 
(3) Mars shows his effects more prominently on Tuesdays, 
when the Moon, the Sun, Mars or Jupiter transits Aries or Scbrpio 
or Mrigashira, Chitraor Dhanishtha Nakshatra. 
(4) Mercury shows his effects more prominently on Wednes- 
days, when Mercury, the Moon, the Sun or Jupiter transits Ge- 
mini or Virgo or Ashlesha, Jyestha or Revati Nakshatras. 
(5) Jupiter shows more prominently his effect on Thursdays, 
when the Sun, the Moon or Jupiter transits Sagittarius or Pisces 
or Punarvasu, Vishakha or Poorvabhadra Nakshatras. 
(6) Venus shows his effects more prominently on Fridays, 
when the Sun, the Moon, Jupiter and Venus transit Taurus or 
Libra or Bharani, Poorvaphalgunior Poorvashadha Nakshatras. 
(7) Saturn shows his effects more prominently on Saturdays, 
when the Sun, the Moon, Jupiter or Saturn transits Capricorn 
or Aquarius, Pushya, Anuradha or Uttarabhadra Nakshatras. 
These are for judging the fruition of good effects. When we 
have to judge the timings of evil effects, substitute Saturn instead 
of Jupiter in paras 1, 2 3, 4 and 6 above. In para 5 add Saturn 
along with, the Sun, the Moon, and Jupiter. In para 7 omit 
Jupiter. 
If the readers do not want to work out the entry of planets 
into and transits through Nakshatras, the following rule may be 
followed. 
More prominent effects of planets are shown during the follow- 
ing months: 
(i) Sun — 16th August to 16th September 
(ii) Moon — 15th July to 15th August 
(iii) Mars — 13th April to 13th May and 15th November to. 
16th December 
(iv) Mercury — 15th June to 15th July and 16th September 
to 16th October 
(v) Jupiter — 16th December to 14th January and 12th 
March to 12th April 
(vi) Venus — 14th May to 14th June and 16th October to 
14th November 
(vii) Saturn — 14th January to 12th March 
When the Antardasha of a planet is current there is greater 
likelihood of the fruition of effects during the above periods ac- 
cording to the Antar of the planet. 
CHAPTER 
TRANSITS 
what is a transit? Transit means the passage of a heavenly body 
—a planet—through the zodiac. We prepare the birth chart on 
the basis of time, that is, the date and year of birth. To judge the 
transits, we need an Ephemeris for the year for which the good 
or bad effects by transits are to be judged. 
Suppose you desire to judge the effects for a person born ear- 
lier, for the year 1969. Then we require two data : (i) the birth 
chart, rising sign and longitudes of planets at birth, (ii) an 
Ephemeris giving the daily longitudes of planets for the year 
1969. 
The transit system consists of appraising the positions of the 
nine planets at a particular time for which the good or bad effects 
are to be ascertained together with the planetary positions and 
the rising sign in the birth chart. Suppose, at the moment the 
Sun is in Libra, then for a correct and detailed appraisal we must 
judge how the Sun in Libra agrees with the rising sign and the 
nine planets in the birth chart. If he is favourable from the 
majority, the Sun in Libra should be declared as yielding good 
effects; but if he is unfavourable from the majority of the natal 
positions of the planets, he should be declared unfavourable. 
This kind of appraisal would no doubt be more detailed and 
scientific, but it involves too much time and labour. This detailed 
examination of the influences exerted by a planet through his 
passage in the zodiac has been discussed at length in Hindu texts, 
307 
but the detailed calculations involved do not make it a very 
popular practice. 
One of the basic theories of Hindu astrology is that all in- 
fluences of planets fructify through the Moon, i.e., the Moon 
being the heavenly body nearest to the earth, the influences filter 
through the Moon. Besides, all happiness and unhappiness is 
experienced by the mind or the heart. 
In Hindu astrology, the reasoning faculty is ascribed to the 
mind, presided over by Mercury and all emotional feelings to the 
heart, presided over by the Moon. The Moon has been figuratively 
described as the 'heart' of God and in every nativity the Moon 
signifies the 'heart' of the native. 
In Western astrology transits of planets are judged vis-a-vis 
the radical longitudes of the planets and the ascending degree; 
but in Hindu astrology the popular and the most widely practised 
method is to judge the transits from the natal Moon. The sign 
in which the Moon is at birth is popularly called the Rashi of 
the native. Rashi literally means a cluster or a heap. But since 
the signs in Hindu astrology are identified with constellations ( 
which contain a heap or cluster of stars, forming a particular 
geometric pattern); the word Rashi has, by extended meaning, 
come to mean a sign and when only the Rashi of a particular 
native is referred to it means the Moon-sign. 
From times immemorial the Moon-sign has acquired the pride 
of place and just as in western astrology, popular predictions 
are made and even published in magazines on the basis of Sun- 
signs, so also in Hindu Panchangas (Ephemerides) and astro- 
logical magazines and journals, and sometimes even in news- 
papers, predictions are published on the basis of the Moon-sign, i. 
e., the sign in which the Moon was at the time of birth. This 
Moon-sign is succinctly referred to as Janina-Rashi — the sign 
occupied by the Moon at birth. We shall also, hereafter, refer 
to the Moon-sign at birth as Janma-Rashi. 
For purposes of judging the transit influences so much im- 
portance is given to the Janina-Rashi, that if the date or time of 
birth of the native is not known and his birth chart cannot be 
erected and the position of the Moon cannot be ascertained, it 
is fixed according to the initial syllable of the name of the 
individual. It is an accepted principle of Hindu astrology that 
the first syllable of a person's name vibrates with certain influences 
308 
and these correspond to certain positions of the Moon in parti- 
cular signs. We give below a table showing the correspondence 
between the initial syllable of the name and the particular Moon- 
sign. 
Aries: chu, choo, the (e as in they) cho (as in chosen) la, a (as 
in woman or father) li, le, lu, loo, la (a as in late) lo. 
Taurus:!, e, u (as in put), a (as in aid), va, wa. vi, wi, ye, we ( 
as in we), wu (u as in put), woo, ye or we as in (weight), vo, or 
wo (as in woe). 
Gemini: ka, ki, ke, ku, koo, ka (a as in kate) ko — also all syllables 
beginning with c having the sound of k as in Catherine. Carol, 
gh, chha, ha (a as in harm). 
Cancer: hi, he (as in he) hu, hoo, he (e as in Henry) ho, da, di, 
de, du doo, de (e as in devil) do (o as in so). (The sound of d in 
this para is as in deed, door etc.). 
Leo: ma, mi, me (as in me), mu, moo, me (e as in menthol) ma ( 
as in Mary), mo (o as in so), ta, ti. te, tu, too. ta (as in tail). (The 
sound of t in this para is as in tea or total). 
Virgo: to (to as in token) pa. pi, pe (as in Peter) pu, poo, tha ( 
hard sound as in Thomas) pa (as in pain), po (o as in so). 
Libra: ra, ri, re, ru, roo, ra (a as in rain), ro (o as in rover) ta. 
ti, tee, tu. too. te (as in Telangana). (the sound of "t" is soft as 
in French). 
Scorpio: to (t soft as in French, o as in so), na, ni, nee, nu, noo. 
ya, yi, ye, yu, yoo. 
Sagittarius: ye (as in yes) ya (as in yale) yo. bha, bhi, bhe bhu. 
bhoo, dha (dh soft as in French) dhe (e as in they), pha or f, phe 
or fe, phe or fi, any word begining with ph or f, bhe. 
Capricorn: bho, ja, ji. je. kha. khi, khe. khu, khoo, khe (e as 
in they), kho (o as in so), ga (sound of g as in gun), ge. 
Aquarius: gu. goo (as in goose), ge (as in get), ga, go (as in go) sa. 
si. see. se (as in sentry), sa (as in said), so. da (sound of d soft as 
in French). 
Pisces: di. dee. due. doo, de (sound of de as in they or that), do 
(o as in so), (sound of d in this para is soft as in French), cha ( 
as in chunk or chart), chi. chee. 
These letters or syllables have been transliterated from the 
Sanskrit alphabet. They therefore appear to have no system. But 
they do have a system in Sanskrit. But why a particular letter or 
syllable should have particular sign allotted to it is a moot point. 
309 
A discussion of the entire proposition — correlation between 
sound vibrations and signs of the zodiac — is too intricate and 
wide a subject to be discussed at length in a text book intended 
for beginners. Besides, such a discussion would be more academic 
than practical. 
If an individual's birth date and time are known and he wants 
to know his Moon-sign, the best and the quickest way is to get 
an Ephemeris for the year and look up the position of the Moon 
on that particular date, at that particular time (time of birth). 
Readers are reminded that the Ephemeris must be one which gives 
the position of the Moon in the sidereal zodiac. If the reader does 
not possess an Ephemeris giving the sidereal positions, after 
ascertaining the Moon's longitude in the tropical zodiac, the 
precession of equinoxes and nutation on the date of birth has to be 
deducted from the tropical zodiac to arrive at the sidereal longi- 
tude of the Moon. 
But when the date and time of birth are unknown, one has to 
go by the above Table. The letters not found in the above list 
should be determined as follows : 
(i) For b look up v or w 
(ii) For g as in go look up g; for g as in German, look up j 
(Hi) For q look up k 
(iv) For sh look up s 
(v) 'or x as in xaivier, look up 
If the Moon sign at birth is not known, the guide to the Moon- 
sign by the initial letter or syllable of the name is the next best 
data. In Western numerological methods, each letter is assigned 
a value and the values of all the letters constituting the name are 
added up and the same is taken as the basis for ascertaining the 
harmonious or inharmonious numbers. In Hindu astrology, 
however, what is important is the first syllable of the name which 
determines the name Rashi (Moon-sign by name) and that is taken 
as the basis for further prognostication. 
Having dealt with the Janma-Rashi (Moon-sign at birth) and 
with name Rashi (Moon-sign according to the name), we shall deal 
with the transits of the planets in particular signs as counted from 
the Moon-sign. 
Transits of the Sun: 
The Fun transiting the third, sixth, tenth, or the eleventh house 
310 
as counted from the Janma-Rashi (Moon) is auspicious. For 
example, if the Moon sign is Scorpio, the Sun's transit through 
Capricorn, Aries, Leo and Virgo is good. In the rest of the signs 
it will not be good. 
The effect of the Sun's transit through each of the houses as 
counted from the Moon-sign at birth is as follows : (1) loss of 
house or position, travelling; (2) loss, fear; (3) gain of money, 
happiness; (4) fear of ailments, loss of respect; (5) humility, poverty, 
loss of money,, expenditure; (6) happiness, annihilation of enemies; 
(7) travelling, loss of money; (8) sickness, fear; (9) loss of lustre, 
inclination to indulge in evil acts; (10) success in undertakings, 
happiness; (11) gain of money, happiness; (12) loss of money, 
apprehension of sickness or trouble. 
Transits of the Moon: 
The Moon completes one cycle of the zodiac in about 27 days. 
He is in one sign, for about two days and a quarter. Suppose 
the Moon at birth is in Scorpio; then the Moon by transit in 
Scorpio will be in the first house; the Moon by transit in Sagit- 
tarius in the second house, and so on. The effects of the transiting 
Moon as counted from the Janma-Rashi (sign occupied by Moon 
at birth) will be as follows : 
(1) Good health, increase, gain; (2) ordinary gain of money; 
(3) good income, happiness; (4) sickness, loss of money, loss of 
respect; (5) happiness but lack of success; (6) gain of money; 
(7) happiness, good income; (8) fear of trouble, an evil time; (9) 
respect, fear from the government; (10) aupicious time, happiness; ( 
11) gain from various sources; (12) sickness, loss of money, 
heavy expenditure. 
Thus it will be observed that the transiting Moon is auspicious 
in the first, third, sixth, seventh, tenth and the eleventh houses as 
counted from the radical Moon. 
Transits of Mars: 
Mars bestows good effects when he transits the third, sixth or 
the eleventh house as counted from the Janma-Rashi. The effects 
of Mars, by transit through various houses as counted from the 
radical Moon, are as follows : 
(1) Fear, trouble — physical or mental; (2) eye troubles; loss of 
money; (3) happiness, gain of wealth; (4) trouble, fear from 
311 
enemies; (5) apprehension of sickness, loss of money; (6) happiness, 
gain of wealth; (7) poor health, heavy expenditure or loss of money; ( 
8) fear, inclination to indulge in sinful acts; (9) apprehension of 
ill-health; (10) happiness, also distress; (11) gain of money and 
happiness; (12) sickness, distress. 
Transits of Mercury: 
The effects of Mercury during transits, as counted from the 
radical Moon are as follows : 
(l)Fear of being confined; (2) gain of money; (3) fear from 
opponents or enemies; (4) gain of money and happiness; (5) 
sickness, distress; (6) no gain, status quo; (7) apprehension of 
trouble, quarrels; (8) gain of money and commodities; (9) ap- 
prehension of ill-health, loss of money; (10) happiness, good 
enjoyment; (11) good time, gain of money; (12) sorrow, loss of 
money, heavy expenditure. 
Transits of Jupiter: 
Jupiter stays in one sign for about a year. Jupiter is a heavy 
planet and while the transits of Mercury, Venus or the Sun,-being 
about a month in each sign, are fleeting Jupiter's stays for a long 
period in each sign and this entitles him to greater importance 
and weightage. When Jupiter during his transit aspects any planet, 
he excites the good influences of that planet which he aspects 
from his transiting position. For example suppose the native's 
ascendant is Scorpio and the Sun is the lord of the tenth house 
in Pisces, Then when Jupiter transits Cancer or Scorpio, he will 
be fully aspecting the radical Sun; or when Jupiter actually 
transits Pisces he will pass over the radical Sun and excite the 
solar influences and the native would benefit in respect of all 
matters governed by the Sun, i.e., the tenth house affairs, because 
the Sun in our example is the lord of the tenth house and all 
matters for which the Sun is a Karaka. So judge Jupiter's transit 
in relation to other planets also. 
The effects of Jupiter's transit through the various houses as 
counted from the Janma-Rashi will be as follows : 
(1) Fear of unfavourable circumstances. In Western • astrology 
Jupiter by transit over the radical Moon is considered good. Not 
so in Hindu astrology; (2) gain of money and commodities; (3) 
fear, sickness; (4) loss of money, fear; (5) gain, happiness; (6) 
312 
sickness, distress; (7) respect, happiness; (8) adversity, troubles, 
both physical and mental; (9) happiness, enhanced prestige, respect 
from others; (10) humility, i.e.. loss of respect; (II) happiness, 
gain of money; (12) sickness, fear. 
Transits of Venus: 
When Venus by transit occupies various houses as counted 
from the Moon-sign of birth, the effects are as follows: 
(1) Happiness, annihilation of enemies; (2) gain of money; (3) 
happiness, gain of wealth; (4) gain of money and comforts : (5) 
gain, happiness in respect of child or children; (6) trouble, in- 
crease in the number of enemies or adverse effects caused by 
opponents; (7) distress, great apprehension, adversity, loss of 
money; (8) gain of money; (9) happiness, gain; (10) loss of religi- 
ous merit — the native may indulge in irreligious acts, want of 
happiness; (11) mental distress but gain of money; (12) increase in 
wealth. 
Transits of Saturn: 
The transit of Saturn is generally unfavourable in respect of 
the house (from the radical ascendant) he transits unless he be 
transiting his own house or unless he be the lord of the ascendant. ( 
i.e., unless Capricorn or Aquarius is the rising sign), when he does 
not damage the affairs of the house he transits. For example, if 
Scorpio is the ascendant and Saturn by transit is in the first 
house, he will be inclined to cause ill-health. When he transits 
Sagittarius he will have a tendency to adversely affect finances. 
In Capricorn, he will not during his transit damage the third 
house because Capricorn is his own sign. When he transits the 
fourth house Aquarius then also he will not damage the fourth 
house affairs because Aquarius is his own sign. When he transits 
Pisces, the fifth house, he will spoil the fifth house affairs of the 
native. The native may have stomach troubles due to sluggish 
digestion or formation of gases (traits of Saturnine diseases), or 
the native's children may suffer in health or career, and so on. 
Saturn also has a depressing influence on the radical planet 
whom during the course of his transit he aspects. For example, 
suppose Scorpio is the ascendant and the Sun, the lord of the 
tenth, is in Pisces. Now when Saturn during his transit, stays in 
Gemini, he will be fully aspecting the radical Sun (the Sun occupy- 
313 
ing Pisces in the birth chart), with the result that affairs pertain- 
ing to the Sun may suffer or have a setback. The Sun is the lord 
of the tenth house, so the native's career may have a setback or 
advancement may be thwarted. Saturn is the planet of death 
and delay and so he spoils matters by prolonging issues or 
keeping them pending and by procrastination. He also causes harm 
from low people, aged persons, labour, servants, enemies and 
opponents. In the above example, the Sun is the lord of the tenth 
and we have explained how his transit would adversely effect 
the native's career. But the Sun is also Karaka for health, 
vigour, personal push, respect, father, government, persons in 
authority, and so Saturn during his transit through Gemini will 
also spoil or damage one or more affairs over which the Sun 
presides. In this way Saturn by transit spoils the affairs pertain- 
ing to the planet he aspects. But if he be the lord of the ascend- 
ant, he will not do so, or if he does any harm it will not be in 
such great measure. 
Now we shall revert to our original line of delineating the 
effects of planets: The effects, of Saturn in the twelve houses 
as counted from the Moon-sign are : 
(1) Great distress and destruction; (2) sorrow, loss of wealth; 
(3) happiness, gain of money; (4) apprehension of trouble, physical 
and mental ailments, fear; (5) loss of wealth, distress to sons or 
children; (6) happiness, gain of money; (7) infirmities, physical 
sickness or mental ailments; (8) increase of enemies or added 
onslaught by enemies, illness or distress; (9) indulgence in sinful 
actions, loss of wealth, retarded income; (10) increase of enmity; ( 
11) gain of money, happiness; (12) trouble all round, upsetting 
of status quo — a very unfavourable time. 
Saturn stays for two and a half years in one sign; so his transits 
are very important. When Saturn transits the twelfth, the first and 
the second house as counted from the radical Moon the period 
comes to seven and a half years (two and a half years in each 
of the three signs) and the combined period of seven and half 
years is generally referred to in India as the Sadhe Safi (the 
phrase literally means seven and a half years). This is generally 
considered a period during which the native does not have peace 
of mind, one thing after another crops up to keep the native 
worried. Few indeed are lucky who do not have a death in. the 
family during these seven and a half years. 
314 
Here again persons in whose nativity the Moon is in Taurus ( 
because Saturn would be the lord of the ninth and the tenth, both 
good houses from the Moon sign) or Libra (because Saturn would 
be, the lord of the fourth and the fifth, both good houses as counted 
from the radical Moon) or Capricorn or Aquarius (because Saturn 
would be the lord of the Moon sign radically) do not fare so 
badly as natives in whose nativities Saturn is the lord of an evil 
house as counted from the natal Moon. 
Transits of Rahu: 
The effect 'of Rahu's transit through the twelve houses as 
counted from the.]anma-,Rashi is as follows: 
(1) Loss, trouble 'both physical or mental; (2) loss of wealth, 
heavy expenditure; (3) good health, gain of money; (4) enmity, 
sorrow; (5) loss, sorrow; (6) happiness, gain of wealth; (7) loss, 
quarrels; (8) illness, fear; (9) inclination to indulge in sinful 
acts; (10) enmity, happiness; (11) happiness, gain of money; (12) 
loss, illness. 
Transits of Kelu: 
The effect of Ketu's transit through the twelve houses as counted 
from the radical Moon are as follows : 
(1) Loss, ill-health or disease; (2) loss of money; (3) happiness, 
gain, increase, (4) fear, trouble both physical or mental; (5) 
sorrow, loss of money; (6) happiness, gain of money; (7) evil 
state of affairs, illness; (8) loss, threatened trouble; (9) sinful 
actions, humility; (10) fear, sorrow; (11) good name and fame, 
gain of money; (12) physical ill-health or mental distress, enmity. 
Having stated succinctly the effects of transits of the nine planets 
through the twelve houses as counted from the radical position 
of the Moon, we shall explain a new feature. This is called Vedha. 
What is Vedha? 
Vedha in Sanskrit means penetrating, piercing, perforating, 
also a measure of time. When a particular position of a transiting 
planet say A, is obstructed by another transiting planet B, the 
latter B is said be obstructing the planet A's influence. Suppose 
light is coming from a particular source. If we put an 
obstruction between the source of light and the spot illuminated, 
the light will be obstructed and would cease to illuminate the 
-345 
spot where it was formerly falling. Similarly, suppose the Sun is 
transiting the third sign as counted from the radical Moon. Now 
if a planet other than Saturn is in the ninth, the influence emitted 
by the Sun, being third from the Moon, will be obstructed and 
the influence due to his transit through the house from the natal 
Moon will not be felt. When describing Vedha for the Sun, we 
have said that any planet other than Saturn will do so. This is 
because the Sun is the father of Saturn, and the Moon the 
father of Mercury. There is no Vedha by the son to the father 
or by the father to the son. The Sun therefore does not cause 
Vedha for Saturn nor does Saturn do so for the Sun. The 
Moon does not cause Vedha to Mercury, nor does Mercury 
cause Vedha to the Moon. 
We give below the corresponding Vedha positions : 
Sun: Auspicious places 
Vedha places 
Moon: Auspicious places 
Vedha places 
Mars: Auspicious places 
Vedha places 
Mercury: Auspicious places 
Vedha places 
Jupiter: Auspicious places 
Vedha places 
Venus: Auspicious places 
Vedha places 
Saturn:. Auspicious places 
Vedha places 
Rahu: Auspicious places 
Vedha places 
Ketu: Auspicious places 
Vedha places 
3 61011 
912 4 5 
(except by Saturn) 
1 3 6 71011 
5 912 2 4 8 
(except by Mercury) 
3 611 
12 9 5 
2 4 6 81011 
5 3 9 1 812 
(except by Moon) 
2 5 7 911 
12 4 310 8 
12 34 589 11 12 
87 110 9 511 63 
3 611 
12 9 5 
(except by Sun) 
3 611 
12 9 5 
3 611 
12 9 5 
Here the auspicious place and the corresponding Vedha place 
are both counted from the radical Moon. Suppose the Moon at 
birth is posited in Cancer and the Sun is transiting Virgo—third 
316 
from the Moon. He would bestow a good effect by transit 
through the third house from the Moon. Now the corresponding 
Vedha place for the third from the Sun is the ninth house. If there- 
fore any planet other than Saturn is transiting Pisces, which is 
the ninth sign from the radical Moon, there will be no good effects 
of the Sun's transit through the third sign from the radical Moon. 
The Sun's influence would be checked, held up or obstructed. 
Reference is invited to the auspicious places of the Sun's 
tan' sit as counted from the radical Moon. They are 3, 6, 10 
and The corresponding Vedha places are 9. 12, 4 and 5. Thus if 
the Sun is in the third from the radical Moon, a planet other 
than Saturn in the ninth from the radical Moon, would obstruct; if 
the. Sun is in the sixth, the Vedha place is the twelfth; if the 
Sun is in the tenth the corresponding Vedha place is the fourth, 
and if the Sun is in the eleventh the corresponding Vedha place 
will be fifth. 
Tie figure under each auspicious place is the corresponding 
Vedha place in relation to it. 
Converse Vedha 
(i) We have discussed the auspicious places of planets as 
counted from the radical place of the Moon and corresponding 
places—also counted from the Moon—which obstruct or check 
the influence emanating from the transiting planet. 
(ii) We now give below the inauspicious places of the transit- 
ing planets, as counted from the radical Moon and the corres- 
ponding Vedha places, which hold up or check the unfavourable 
influence; but here while the inauspicious places are counted from 
the radical Moon, the corresponding Vedha places are nor 
counted from the radical Moon but from the transiting planet. 
For example, the Sun transiting the fourth from the radical place 
is inauspicious. Suppose the Moon is in Cancer; flow fourth from 
Calton will be Libra. So if the Sun transits Libra, his influence 
would be unfavourable to the native. Now if a planet other than 
Saturn, because the Sun and Saturn do not mutually Vedha each 
other, is in the third from the Sun (not from the Moon), i.e. in 
Sagittarius, he will obstruct the evil influence of the Sun. By this 
converse Vedha not only is the adverse influence nullified, but 
even the evil transit becomes good. 
Below are given the inauspicious places of transit as counted 
317 
from the radical Moon, and under each such place is also given 
the corresponding Vedha position as counted .from the transiting 
planet: 
Sun: Inauspicious places 4 5 9 12 
Vedha places 3 6 10 11 
Moon: Inauspicious places 4 5 8 9 12 
Vedha places 3 6 7 10 11 
Mars: Inauspicious places 5 9 12 
Vedha places 3 6 9 
Mercury: Inauspicious places 3 6 7 9 12 
Vedha places 2 5 8 10 11 
Jupiter: Inauspicious places 3 4 10 12 
Vedha places 2 5 9 11 
Venus: Inauspicious places 6 7 10 
Vedha places 2 5 9 
Saturn: Inauspicious places 5 9 12 
Vedha places 3 6 1 
Rahu: Inauspicious places 
Vedha places 3 6 11 
Ketu: Inauspicious places 5 9 12 
Vedha places 3 6 11 
It is further reiterated that the Sun does not cause Vedha to 
Saturn nor Saturn to the Sun, similthe_eleventhn does not cause 
Vedha to Mercury nor Mercury to the Moon. 
Some Factors which Moexaltation. t Influences 
Of all the factors which modify the transit influences, the 
most important is the Vedha. But there are some other factors 
also which modify the influences. These are as follow : 
(i) If the planet is strong in the radix, he shows very good 
results, when he is good by transit and even when transiting an 
adverse house, he does not show such evil result and particularly 
so if he tenants the third, sixth, tenth or the_pleventh house from 
the ascendant in the birth chart. By strong, we mean in his sign 
of exaltation, in his own sign or great friend's or friend's sign 
and conjoined with a benefit and well aspected. 
(ii) If the planet is weak and afflicted in the radix, he does not 
even when transiting a good house show very good results; and 
when he transits an evil house, he shows very evil results. By 
weak and afflicted we mean in his sign of debilitation, in great 
318 
enemy's or enemy's sign, conjoined with or aspected by malefics. 
(iii) A planet expected to yield good results does not do so 
if he is aspected by a malefic during the transit. 
(iv) A plat* expected to yield unfavourable results does not 
do so if during his transit he is aspected by a benefic. 
(v) If during the course of transit, a planet becomes combust 
or conjoined with a malefic or transits his sign of debilitation or 
great enemy's or enemy's sign, his power to do good is curtailed 
and his power to do evil is enhanced. 
(vi) If during the course of his transit, a planet is in his sign 
of exaltation, own sign or great friend's or friend's sign and con- 
joined with a benefic, his power to do good is enhanced and his 
power to do evil is curtailed. 
(vii) A benefic, when during the course of his transit becomes 
retrograde, becomes more benefic. Conversely, when a malefic 
during the course of his transit becomes retrograde, his power to 
do evil is enhanced. 
(viii) While judging the effect of the transit primarily from the 
radical Moon, the house transited by the planet should also be 
adjudged from the ascendant. For example, if Virgo is the 
ascendant in a nativity and Moon is in Cancer, Saturn's transit 
through Leo, being second from the radical Moon, will be evil. 
Now, Leo is twelfth from the ascendant and the house of expendi- 
ture and losses as counted from the ascendant. So Saturn's tran- 
sit through Leo will be doubly evil. Let us take another example. 
Suppose Pisces is the rising sign or the ascendant and the radical 
Moon is in Leo in the sixth. When Jupiter transits Sagittarius, 
fifth from the Moon, he will be auspicious. But as counted from 
the ascendant, Jupiter lord of the tenth will be transiting tenth. 
So Jupiter will be doubly good. 
(ix) When the Sun. Mars, Jupiter and Saturn are simultane- 
ously transiting the first, eighth or the twelfth from the radical 
Moon, it is a very evil time for the native. It may cause loss of 
position, loss of wealth, serious illness, any one or all of these. 
(x) The Sun in the fifth, Moon in the eighth, Mars in the 
seventh, Mercury in the sixth, Jupiter in the third, Venus in the 
sixth, Saturn in the first and Rahu in the ninth, bring about loss 
of honour and wealth and even danger to life, if all the above 
transits occur simultaneously. 
(xi) The Sun and Mars have a tendency to show their effect 
319 
when they enter a sign and their influence is more prominent in 
the initial ten degrees of the sign: Jupiter and Venus bestow 
their full effect by transit when they transit the middle of the 
sign, from the eleventh to the twentieth degrees, and the Moon, 
and Saturn in the last one-third of the sign that is, from the 
twenty-first to the thirtieth degrees. Mercury and Rahn show 
uniformly good or evil effect throughout their passage through 
the sign from zero to thirty degrees. 
(xii) The good effects of a house as counted from the ascen- 
dant, are felt when the lord of the ascendant or the lord of the 
house or Karaka for the house transits the house concerned. For 
example, suppose we have to determine the birth of a son. This 
is judged from the fifth house. When the lord of the first house, 
lord of the fifth house or the Karaka for son, i.e., Jupiter, when 
one or more of these planets transit the fifth, there is likelihood 
of the birth of a son or if sons are already adults, their affairs 
may prosper. 
(xiii) When the house is transited by the lord of the eighth as 
counted from the house concerned, the affairs pertaining to the 
house transited suffer. 
(xiv) To judge when good effects pertaining to a house will 
prosper add the longitudes (signs, degrees, minutes and seconds) 
of the lord of the house, lord of the ascendant and the Karaka of 
the house when Jupiter transits this point, it will be good. 
(xv) Whatever effect has been delineated due to a planet's loca- 
tion in the birth chart, it comes to pass when that planet transits 
the ascendant. 
(xvi) The good or evil effects pertaining to a planet are stirred 
into action when the lord of the ascendant passes during transit 
over the radical position of the planet. 
(xvii) When several planets are simultaneously transiting good 
places and the Mahadasha and Antardasha current are also good, 
very good effects are felt. 
(xviii) When several planets are simultaneously transiting evil 
places and the Mahadasha and Antardasha current are also evil, 
very adverse results are experienced. 
(xix) A conjunction of two or more Papas near about the 
ascending degree or the longitude occupied by the radical Sun, 
Moon or any planet is evil. 
(xx) An eclipse over the ascending degree, Sun or Moon is evil. 
320 
What has been said above is quite sufficient for delineating the 
effects of transits. A large number of astrologers base their pre- 
dictions on transits alone and do not take the trouble of 
erecting a complete birth chart or calculating the Mahadashaor A 
ntardasha. It is hoped readers will take advantage of this book 
and learn astrology correctly and those who have already read a 
few books on the subject, will also find here many things both 
new and stimulating. 
APPENDIX 
PRECESSION OF EQUINOX AND NUTATION FROM 
1880 TO 1972 ON THE 1ST JANUARY OF EACH YEAR 
322 
1900 22 28 5 
1901 22 28 52 
1902 22 29 39 
1903 22 30 24 
1904 22 31 8 
1905 22 31 53 
1906 22 32 38 
1907 22 33 24 
1908 22 34 12 
1909 22 35 2 
1910 22 35 54 
1911 22 36 47 
1912 22 37 42 
1913 22 38 38 
1914 22 39 34 
1915 22 40 29 
1916 22 41 24 
1917 22 42 17 
1918 22 43 8 
1919 22 43 57 
1920 22 44 45 
1921 22 45 31 
1922 22 46 16 
1923 22 47 0 
1924 22 47 44 
1925 22 48 30 
1926 22 49 17 
'1927 22 50 6 
1928 22 50 56 
1929 22 51 49 
1930 22 52 43 
1931... 22 53 38 
1932 22 54 33 
1933 22 55 30 
1934 22 56 25 
1935 22 57 19 
1936 22 58 11 
1937 22 59 2 
1938 22 59 50 
1939 23 0 37 
Appendix 
GLOSSARY OF ASTROLOGICAL TERMS 
Afflicted. When a planet is unfavourably placed by sign and 
house and is conjoined with or aspected by a malefic or malefics. 
Angles. The first, fourth, seventh and tenth houses. 
Aquarius. The eleventh sign of the zodiac. 
Aries. The first sign of the zodiac. 
Ascendant. The sign which is rising at the eastern horizon at 
birth. 
Aspect. See Chapter 6. 
Benefics. Moon in the bright fortnight, Mercury not associated 
with malefics, Venus and Jupiter are benefics in increasing 
order. 
Cadent. The third, sixth, ninth and twelfth houses or the 
planets there in a horoscope. 
Cancer. The fourth sign of the zodiac. 
Capricorn. The tenth sign of the zodiac. 
Caput Draconis. The northern node of Moon called Rahu. 
Cauda Draconis. The sourthern node of the Moon called 
Ketu. 
Combust. When a planet is not visible due to nearness to the 
Sun. See Chapter 10. 
Common signs. Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces. 
Configurated. The relative position of planets in a horoscope. 
Conjunction. Location of two planets in the same sign. 
Constellation. Group of fixed stars called Nakshatras. 
Daily motion. The average motion of a planet in twenty-four 
325 
hours. 
Debilitation. Certain planets in certain signs are considered 
weak. See Chapter 6. 
Degree. One-thirtieth part of a sign and l/360th of a circle. 
Degree rising. The exact degree on the cusp of the first house, 
i.e., rising at the eastern horizon at birth. 
Direct motion. When a planet is moving forward this is direct 
motion. The Sun and Moon have direct motion. Other planets 
have retrograde motion also. Rahu and Ketu have always re- 
trograde motion. 
Directional Strength. See Chapter 6. 
Dispositor. The lord of the sign in which a planet is. Suppose 
the Moon is in Taurus, then Venus is the dispositor of the Moon. 
Ecliptic. The imaginary belt which the Sun appears to move 
in. In fact, it is the path traversed by the earth in going round 
the Sun in one year. This path is not circular but elliptic. 
Exaltation. Certain planets are strong in certain signs and then 
they are called exalted. See Chapter 6. 
Fixed signs. Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, Aquarius. 
Gemini. The third sign of the zodiac. 
House. The division of the zodiac into twelve parts, each part 
being called a house. See Chapter 7. 
Ill-placed. Unfavourable location by sign and house and con- 
joined with or having the aspect of a malefic or malefics. 
Jupiter. One of the nine planets (presiding over Thursday). 
Latitude. On the earth, as given in geographical maps the 
distance in degrees north or south of the equator. In the heavens, 
distance in degrees north or south of the ecliptic line. 
Leo. The fifth sign of the zodiac. 
Libra. The seventh sign of the zodiac. 
Local Mean Time. See Chapter 4. 
Longitude. On earth as given in geographical maps, the dis- 
tance east or west from Greenwich meridian. In the heavens, it is 
the distance from 0 or beginning of Aries. 
Lords. Certain planets are lords or rulers of certain signs. 
See Chapter 5. 
Malefics. The Moon in the dark half, Mercury associated with 
a malefic, Sun, Ketu, Mars, Rahu and Saturn are malefics in in- 
creasing order. 
Mars. One of the seven planets presiding over Tuesday. 
326 
Mercury. One of the planets presiding over Wednesday. 
Meridian. On earth, longitude of Greenwich. In the heavens, 
the degree passing over the cusp of the tenth house. 
Mid-heaven. The cusp of the tenth house, the meridian above 
the earth. 
Moon. One of the seven planets (presiding over Monday). 
Movable Signs. Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn. 
Natal. As at the time of birth. 
Native. The person whose birth chart is being made or is 
under discussion. 
Nativity. The birth chart or the horoscope. 
Node. Nodes of the Moon called Rahu and Ketu in Hindu 
astrology. 
Own house. Certain planets are deemed to be lords or rulers 
of particular signs. When the sign falls in a particular house, the 
planet is said to own the house or be lord or ruler of the house 
in which his sign falls. 
Pisces. The twelfth sign of the zodiac. 
Planets. Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, 
Rahu and Ketu. 
Precession of the Equinoxes. See Chapter 1. 
Quincunx. In sixth and eighth from each other. 
Radical. As in the birth chart. 
Radically. As in the birth chart. 
Retrograde. The backward motion which the planets appear 
to have at times on account of the position and motion of the 
earth. Rahu and Ketu are always retrograde. The Sun and Moon 
are never retrograde. The other planets are at time retrograde. 
Rising sign. The sign rising at the eastern horizon at the birth 
place at the time of birth. 
Rider. See Lord, and own house. 
Sagittarius. The ninth sign of the zodiac. 
Saturn. One of the seven planets presiding over Saturday. 
Scorpio. The eighth sign of the zodiac. 
Sidereal Time. Angular distance of the first point of Aries in 
the tropical zodiac. If we convert the hours, minutes and seconds 
on the: basis of fifteen degrees for each hour, it would give the 
right ascension of the meridian cusp in time. 
Signs. The ecliptic or the zodiac is divided into twelve parts 
each comprising 30°. The twelve signs in order are Aries, Taurus, 
327 
Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capri- 
corn, Aquarius and Pisces. 
Standard Time. Time by the watch prevalent in a particular 
country. The Indian Standard Time is 5 hours 30 minutes ahead 
of Greenwich Mean Time. This is since 1906. Before that Madras 
Time was the Indian Standard Time. 
Stationary. When a planet due to the earth's motion appears 
to be stationary. This is either when a planet changes from direct 
motion to retrograde motion or vice versa. 
Succedent house. The second, fifth, eighth and eleventh houses. 
Sun. One of the seven planets (presiding over Sunday.) 
Taurus. The second sign of the zodiac. 
Transit. The passage of any planet through the zodiac. 
Trine. The fifth and the ninth houses. The first house is a 
trine as well as an angle. 
Venus. One of the seven planets (presiding over Friday). 
Virgo. The sixth sign of the zodiac. 
Well-placed. Location is a good sign and house and conjoined 
with or aspected by a benefic or benefics. 
Zodiac. The imaginary belt comprising 8 degrees on either 
side of the ecliptic. See Chapter 1. 
INDEX TO SANSKRIT TERMS 
Below are being given Sanskrit words, used in this book and the 
references to pages where they have been explained. This will also serve 
the purpose of the glossary referred to on page 185. 
Abhijit, 5 Ativasuman, 194 
Adhi, 109 Avanti, 84 
Adhika masa, 23 Avaroha, 69 
Adhiyoga, 194 Avayoga, 212 
Amala, 205 Ayanansha, 34 
Amavasya, 23 Ayushmana, 26 
Ambara, 84 
Anala, 20 
Ananda, 20 Bahudhanya, 20 
Anapha, 197 B al ava, 24 
Angira, 20 Bandhus, 153 
Antara, 257 Basti, 53 
Antardasha. 257 Bava, 24 
Anuradha, 5 Beeja Sanskara, 28 
Apachaya, 185 Bengali San, 19 
Apoklima, 62 Bhadra, 21 
Ardra, 4 Bhadra, 31 
Aroha, 69 Bhadra yoga, 202 
Ashadha, 21 Bhagya yoga, 211 
Ashlesha. 4 Bhagya, 97 
Ashtami, 23 Bharani, 4 
Ashubhamala, 206 Bhava, 20 
Ashwina, 21 Bhava. 107 
Ashwini, 4 Bheda, 83 
Asta, 185 Bhukti, 257 
Astra yoga, 210 Brahma, 26 
Asura yoga, 211 Brahma, 81 
Asus. 34 Brahmanas, 58 
atiganda, 26 Buddha, 19 
330 Index to Sanskrit Terms 
Chaitra, 21 
Chamara, 270 
Chamara yoga, 210 
Chara, 59 
Chaturdashi, 23 
Chaturthi, 23 
Chatushpada, 24 
Chera, 57 
Chhatra yoga, 210 
Chitra, 4 
Chitrabhanu, 20 
Chola, 57 
Dainya yoga, 209 
Dama yoga, 206 
Dana, 83 
Danda, 83 
Daridra yoga, 214 
Dasha, 251 
Dashami, 23 
Dhanishtha, 5 
Dhanu, 8 
Dharma, 110 
Dharmashala, 112 
Dharmasthana, 119 
Dhata, 20 
Dhatu, 62 
Dhenu yoga, 210 
Dhriti, 26 
Dhruva, 26 
Dhundiraja, 108 
Dosha, 185 
Dreshkana, 100 
Durga, 81 
Dundubhi. 20 
Durmati, 20 
Durmukha, 20 
Durudhara, 197 
Duryoga, 213 
Dushkriti yoga, 213 
Dusthana, 187 
Dwadashi, 23 
Dwapara. 19 
Dwiswabhava, 59 
Dwiteeya, 23 
Ekadashi, 23 
Ekavaliyoga, 207 
Gaja Kesari Yoga, 198 
Ganda, 26 
Gandanta, 66 
Gara, 24 
Gauri yoga, 199 
Gautamika,' 84 
Ghatis. 27 
Grahas, 3 Gola 
yoga. 205 
Gunas, 78 
Gurus, 85 
Hansa yoga, 202 
Hanuman, 81 
Harsha yoga, 213 
Harshana. 26 
Rasta, 4 
Hemalamba, 20 
Flora lagna, 236 
Indra, 26 
Indra, 81 
Ishtam, 35 
Ishwara, 20 
Jaunini, 92 
Jaladhi yoga, 210 
Janma-Rashi, 307 
Jatakabharana, 108 
Jataka Parijat,' 87 
Jatakaratna,5 111 
Jaya, 20 
Jeeva, 62 
Jyeshtha, 21 
Jyeshtha, 5 
Kahala yoga, 204 
Kala purusha, 52 
Kalayukta, 20 
Kabnga, 84 
Kaliyuga, 19 
Kalyan Varma," 159 
Kama yoga, 211 
Kanya, 8 
Kapha, 78 
Karaka, 84, 87, 187 
Index to .Sanskrit Terms 331 
Karakatwa, 270 
Karana, 24 
Karka, 8 
Karnata, 57 
Kartika, 21 
Kaulava, 24 
Kedar yoga, 205 
Keelaka, 20 
Keeta, 61 
Kemadruma yoga, 197 
Kendra, 61 
Kendra-Trikona yoga, 216 
Kerala, 57 
Keshava,7 280 
Ketu, 3 
Khala yoga. 209 
Khanda. 66 
Khandanta, 66 
Khara, 20 
Khyati yoga, 211 
Kinstughna, 24 
Kleeva yoga, 208 
Kollam era, 19 
Kollasa. 57 
Koshala, 57 
Krishna, 23 
Krishna Paksha, 23 
Krittika, 4 
Krodhan, 20 
Krodhi, 20 
Krura, 89 
Kshatriya, 58 
Kshaya, 20 
Ksheena Chandra, 83 
Kuhoo yoga, 212 
Kumbha, 8 
Laghu Parashari, 278 
Lagnam, 14 
Lagna Rashi, 52 
Lakshmi yoga, 203 
Madhya yoga, 208 
Maghadha,8 84 
Magha, 4 
Magha, 21 
Mahabhagya yoga, 200 
Mahadasha, 251 
Mahapurusha yoga, 202 
Mahayoga, 208 
Malavya yoga, 203 
Malaya, 57 
Malika yoga, 207 
Makara, 8 
Manchaka, 6 
Mandapa, 104 
Mangal yoga, 208 
Mangalika, 234 
Manmatha, 20 
Mantras, 159 
M an treshwar," 92 
Maraka, 187 
Maraka Sthana, 186 
Mardala, 6 
Margashirsha, 21 
Mathas, 98 
Meena, 8 
Mesha, 8 
Mithuna, 8 
Mlechchhas, 81 
Moola, 5 
Moola, 62 
Moola Trikona, 70 
Mridanga, 6 
Mrigashira, 4 
Mritiyoga, 212 
Musala yoga, 211 
Naga, 24 
Nakshatra, 201 
Nandan, 20 
Navami, 23 
Navansha, 86 
Neechabhilashi, 70 
Nirayan, 42 
Nirbhagya yoga, 213 
Niswa yoga, 212 
Paddhati, 93 
Pakshabala, 121 
Pala, 27 
Palabha, 34 
Pamar yoga, 213 
Pan, 240 
Panaphar, 62 
Panchala,11 57 
332 Index to Sanskrit Terms 
Panchami, 23 
Panchanga, 24 
Pandya, 57 
Papa, 82 
Papa Kartari, 194 
Papi, 90 
Parabhava, 20 
Parashara," 87 
Paridhavi, 20 
Parigha, 26 
Parthiva, 20 
Parvata, 84 
Pasha yoga, 206 
Patala, 57 
Pausha, 21 
Phaladeepika," 87 
Phalguna, 21 
Pingala, 20 
Pitta, 78 
Playa, 20 
Plavanga, 20 
Poorvabhadra, 5 
Poorvaphalguni, 4 
Poorvashadha, 5 
Poomima, 23 
Prabhava, 20 
Prajapati, 20 
Pramathi, 20 
Pramoda, 20 
Prashna marga," 100 
Pratipat, 23 
Pratyantardasha, 303 
Prishthoday, 63 
Prithvi, 81 
Priti, 26 
Punarvasu, 4 
Punya, 106 
Pushkala yoga, 200 
Pushya, 4 
Rahu, 3 
Rajasika, 78 
Raja yoga, 189 
Rakshasa, 20 
Raktaksha, 20 
Rashi, 51 
Rashi, 309 
Raudra, 20 
Revati, 5 
Rohini, 4 
Ruchaka yoga, 202 
Rudhirodgari, 20 
Rudra, 81 
Rudra, 98 
Sadharana, 20 
Sadharmi, 298 
Sadhya, 26 
Saindhava," 57 
Sama, 83 
Sambandha, 189 
Sambandhi, 299 
Samvata, 20 
Sandhi, 60 
Sanhara Khand, 66 
Sanketnidhi," 100 
Saptami, 23 
Sarala yoga, 213 
Saraswati yoga, 205 
Saravali," 159 
Sarini, 34 
Sarvajit, 20 
Sarvadhari, 20 
Sarvartha Chintamani," 87 
Satayuga, 19 
Satwika, 78 
Saubhagya, 26 
Saumya, 89 
Saumya, 20 
Shachi, 81 
Shakata yoga, 199 
Shaka, 20 
Shakuna, 24 
Shankha yoga, 214 
Shanti, 31 
Sharvari, 20 
Shasha yoga, 203 
Shashthi, 23 
Shastras, 97 
Shatabhisha, 5 
Shesha, 81 
Shirshodaya, 63 
Shiva, 26 
Shiva, 195 
Shobhana, 26 
Shobhana, 20 
Index to Sanskrit Terms 333 
Shoola, 26 
Shoola yoga, 205 
Shorya yoga, 210 
Shravana, 5 
Shravana, 21 
Shri Kantha; 195 
Shrimukha, 20 
Shrinatha yoga, 214 
Shripati,19 280 
Shubha, 82, 83, 89, 90 
Shubha, 26 
Shubha Kartari, 193 
Shubhamala, 206 
Shubhakrit, 20 
Shudras, 58 
Shukla, 20 
Shukla, 21 
Shukla, 26 
Shukla Paksha, 21 
Siddhartha, 20 
Siddha, 26 
Siddhi, 26 
Sinha, 8 
Srishti Khanda, 66 
Sthira, 59 
Sthiti Khanda, 66 
Subhanu, 20 
Subrahmanya, 81 
Sudarshan Chakra, 52 
Sukarma, 26 
Sunapha yoga, 197 
Suparijata yoga, 211 
Surya-Siddhanta," 27 
Sushubha, 194 
Swati, 4 
Taitil, 24 
Tamasika, 78 
Tar ana, 20 
Tithi, 21 
Tor ana, 6 
Trayodashi, 23 
Tretayuga, 19 
Trika, 192 
Trikona, 216 
Triteeya, 23 
Tula, 8 
Ubhayachari, 197 
Uchchabhilashi, 69 
Ududaya Pradeepa, 278 
Upachaya, 192 
Uttarabhadra, 5 
Uttarakalamtrita, 100 
Uttara Phalguni, 4 
Uttarashadha, 5 
Vaidhriti, 26 
Vaidyanatha," 100 
Vaishakha, 21 
Vaishya, 58 
Vajra, 26 
Vali, 6 
Vallaki yoga, 206 
Vanija, 24 
Varaha Mihir," 129 
Variyan, 26 
Vashi, 197 
Vasuman, 198 
Vata, 78 
Vedas, 104 
Vedha, 314 
Veena, 55 Veena 
yoga, 206 
Veshi, 197 
Vibhava, 20 
Vidya, 97 
Vijaya, 20 
Vikari, 20 
Vikram, 20 
Vikram Samvata, 20 
Vikrit, 20 
Vilamba, 20 
Vimala yoga, 214 
Vipala, 27 
Viranchi, 196 
Virodhi, 20 
Virodha Krit, 20 
Vishakha, 5 
Vishkumbha, 26 
Vishnu, 81 
Vishti, 24 
Vishwavasu, 20 
Vriddhi, 26 
Vrischika, 8 
Vrisha, 20 
Yajnas, 206 
Yamaganda, 31 
Yantras, 105 
Yavana, 57 
Yavana, 84 
index to Sanskrit Terms 
Yoga, 25, 26 
Yoga, 192 
Yogakaraka, 192 
Yogas, 192 
Yogi (ascetic), 189 
Yoni, 6 
Yudhisthira, 19 
Yuga yoga, 205 
Yuva, 20 
Yogakaraka, 192 
Foot Note- 
It is difficult to identify ancient names for some geographical regions 
with the names of the modern regions, so they have been given as stated 
in the old texts. 1 The present Godavari river. 2, 6, 7, 10, 12, 19, 21 and 
22 Ancient masters of Hindu Astrology. 3, 4, 5, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 20 
Classical Sanskrit texts on Hindu Astrology. 8 part of modern Bihar. 
9 part of modern Kerala. 11 the modern Punjaba. 15 the modern Sindha. 
23 Yamaganda: Divide the duration of day (sunrise to sunset) by 15 and 
multiply by 9, 7, 5, 3, 1, 13 and 11 to arrive at the time of yamaganda 
on the seven week days (beginning from Sunday) respectively. 
INDEX 
Actions, 99, 104-106, 112, 120, 124, 
127, 131, 136, 139, 140, 142, 
144, 154, 157, 158, 160, 161, 
163-167, 171, 172, 174. Also 
see yogas. 
Adverse, ascendant degrees 32, 
49, 66 - Constellations 31- 
degrees of Moon 31-32, 65-66 
-karanas 31 - lunar dates 30- 
3 1 - yogas 41. 
Angles, Planets in 178, 179, 207. 
Antara, balance of first 258-259 - 
calculation of 257 - duration 
of 257-general principles to 
judge 260-303-special rules 
to judge 302 - table of 257-258. 
Antar and Dasha Lords, both 
malefic 294-295 - both benefic 
294-295 - mutual disposition 
295 - of contrary nature 294, 
300 - relationship 295, 299, 300 
Antardasha. See Antar 
Antara in, evil dasha 294, 295 
296 - good dasha 294, 297 - 
own dasha 298 yogakarak's 
dasha 300, 301. 
Antar Lord, location of 295 - 
lordship of 295, 296 - transit 
of 304, 305. 
Antara of Ketu, in yogakarak's 
das ha 301. 
Antar of, lords of angles 297 - 
lord of eighth 296, 298 - lord 
of eleventh 298 - lord of 
second 296 - lord of sixth 295, 
296, 298 - lord of third 298 
-lord of trine 297 -lord of 
twelfth 296- papa 296, 297, 
301-sadharmi 29 8, 299 - 
Sambandhi 296-300 - Saturn 
296 - shubha 296-298, 301 - 
yogakaraka297, 300, 301. 
Antara of Rahu, in yogakarak's 
dasha3Q\. 
Antara of Saturn, in Venus dasha 
300. 
Antara of Venus, in Saturn dasha 
300. 
Appearance, 46-49, 76, 77, 96, 100, 
107, 117-119, 123-125, 127, 128, 
130, 134-137, 139-141, 150, 152- 
155, 161, 163-167, 171, 172, 
174. 
Aquarius, as ascendant 49 - 
attributes of 55-63- benefics 
for 285 - Jupiter in 137 - 
Ketu in 145 - malefics for 285 
- Mars in 130- Mercury in 
133, - Moon in 49, 125 - 
parts of the body 53 - Rahu 
in 145-Saturn in 145 -Sun 
in 120, 121-Venus in 141. 
Also see Signs. 
Aries, as ascendant 46 - attributes 
of 55-63, benefics for 284 - 
Jupiter in 134 - Ketu in 145 - 
malefics for 284 - Mars in 126 
- Mercury in 130 - Moon in 
46, 122, 123-parts of body 
53 - Rahu in 145 - Saturn in 
336 Index 
141, 142 - Sun in 116, 117 - 
Venus in 138. Also see Signs. 
Ascendant; 13-16, 33, 43-50 - 
calculation of 38-42. Also see 
Aries, Taurus etc. and House I. 
Ascending Degrees, 15, 49, 50. 
Ascending Sign, see Ascendant. 
Aspects, benefit 73-75, 177, 184, 
220, 222, 227 - malefic 75, 176- 
178, 184. 187, 220. 227 - of 
planets 73-75, 181, 184 - 
strength, of 74, 182, 183,220. 
Astrological Terminology, 324- 
327. 
Backward Motion, 3, 11, 66, 178 
Birth chart 13, 38-45 - data 13, 
38 - date of 13, 38 - place of 
13, 38 - time of 13, 38 
Birth Chart, Calculation of 38-45 
-- patterns of 43-45. 
Blind Signs, 60 
Body, humours of 78 - ingre- 
dients of 76 - parts of - see 
body and its parts 
Body and its Parts, 46-49, 76, 78, 
99, 100-113, 116, 119, 122-130, 
134, 140, 142, 145, 154, 155, 
161, 168 
Bright Fortnight, 21, 22, 23 
Cadent Houses, planets in 179, 
207 
Calendar, different 19, 20 - years 
19, 20, 256 
Cancer, as ascendant 32, 47 - 
attributes of 55-63 - benefics 
for 284 -Jupiter in 135 - 
Ketu in 145 - malefics for 284 
- Mars in 127 - Mercury in 
131 - parts of body 53 - 
Rahu in 145 - Saturn in 
142 - Sun in 117, 118 - Venus 
in 139 - tropic of 10, 11, 12. 
Also see Signs 
Capricorn, as ascendant 48 - 
attributes of 55-63, - benefics 
for 285 - Jupiter in 137 - 
Ketu in 145 - malefics for 
285 - Mars in 129, 130 - 
Mercury in 133 . Moon in 48, 
125 - parts of body 53 - Rahu 
in 145 - Saturn in 144 -Sun 
in 120 - Venus in 140, 141 - 
tropic of 10, 11, 12. Also see 
Signs 
Caput Draconis, 3, 66, see Rahu 
Castes of, planets 81, signs 58 
Cauda Draconis, 3, 66, see Ketu 
Characteristics of planets - see 
planets - signs, see Signs 
Colour of, planets 78 - signs 57 
Combust Planets, see Planets 
Comforts, 46-49, 104, 112, 113, 
114, 123, 128, 135, 139, 153, 155, 
158, 160, 163-165, 169, 174 
Commencement of year, 20, 21 
Common Signs, planets in, 180 
Conjunction of Planets, 168, 181, 
182, 221, 222, 243 
Constellations, 4, 5, 31 - and 
dashas 251, 252 - and signs 7, 
9 - eunuch 201 - female 201 
— jurisdiction of 7, 9 - longi- 
tudes of 6-8 - male 201 - 
names of 4-6 - number of 
stars 6 - shape of 6. 
Crawling signs, 61 
Cusps of Houses, 12, 94 
Cycle of Sixty Years, 20 
Dark Fortnight, 21, 22, 23 
Dasha, balance of first 252-256 - 
calculation of 251-257 - com- 
putation of years 256 - dura- 
tion of 251 - first 251-256 - 
judgment of 260-293 due to 
ascendant 260, 261, 263, 264, 
278-286 - due to karaka 261, 
263-272 - due to other con- 
siderations 261, 282-293 - 
due to ownership of houses 260- 
263, 272-289 - order of 251, 
252 - table to ascertain - 253- 
255 
Dasha and, Constellations 251, 
252 - karaka, effect of 264- 
272 - karaka's location 
272 -ownership 272-289 - 
Index 337 
bandha 264, 273. 281. 284, 285, 
287-289. 
Dasha and Ascendants, Aquarius 
285 - Aries 284 - Cancer 284 
Capricorn 285 - Gemini 284 
Leo 284 - Libra 284 - 
Pisces 285 - Sagittarius 285 - 
Scorpio 284, 285 - Taurus 284 
Virgo 284. 
Dasha Lord, arohi 290 - avarohi 
290 - benefic 263 - combust 
290-292 - enemy of any house 
lord 293 - in conjunction with 
290, 292 - in 2nd, 4th, 9th, 
10th or 11th from any house 
292 -- in 6th. 8th or 12th from 
any house 291 - location of 
293 - malefic 263 - retrograde 
290 -- transits of 292. 
Dasha Lord in Sign, common 291, 
correlation with house 291 - 
fixed 291 - in particular 
degrees 291 — movable 291 -- 
Pisces 291 — Prishthodaya29l 
Shirshodaya 291. 
Dasha Lord in Sign of, debilita- 
tion 290 — enemy 290 - exalta- 
tion 289. 290. -- friend 290 - 
great enemy 290 - great friend 
290 -- neutral 290 - own 
house 289. 290. 
Dasha of. Jupiter 267, 268, 284, 
285 Ketu 271. 272, 286, 287 
-- Mars 266. 267. 284, 285 - 
Mercury 267, 268. 284. 285 - 
Moon 265, 266, 284, 285 - 
Rahu 270, 271. 286, 287 - 
Saturn 269. 270, 284 - Sun 
264, 265, 284. 285 - Venus 
268, 269, 284, 285. 
Dasha of Lord of. angles 281-283, 
287 - eight 275, 281. 282, 287 
eleventh 276. 280, 281. 287 
fifth 274, 282. 288 - first 
272, 282, 288 - fourth 
273, 274, 282, 288 - ninth 275, 
276, /282, 288 - second 273, 
281, 288, 289 - seventh 274, 
275, 282. 288, 289 - sixth 274, 
280, 281, 287 - tenth 276, 282, 
288 - third 273. 280, 281, 287 
- trine 280, 283, 287 - 
twelfth 276, 281, 282. 
Dasha of Maraka, 283-286, 288, 
289. 
Day births, 178. 
Deaf signs, 60. 
Death, 288, 289. Also see Dasha 
of Maraka. 
Declination, 10, 11. 
Debilitation of Planets, 68 
Degree Rising, see Ascending 
degree. 
Diseases, 47. 48, 84, 85, 95. 101, 
106. 107. 110, 114, 117, 119, 
121, 122, 126-130. 136, 139-142, 
144. 149-151, 153. 155-159, 162, 
164-172, 174, 175, 208, 222. 
Dispositer of, Ketu 169 - Rahu 
169. 
Duration of, karanas 24, 25, 30 - 
lunar dates 21-23, 30 - sign 
rising 18. 33-34 - yoga 25, 26. 
Earth, 1. 3, 11, 16-19 - axis of 
34 - path of 2, 14, 34 - re- 
volution of 1. 
Ecliptic. 1-4, 11, 13, 17 - path 
on 34 , 52 - plane of 14. 
Effect of Planets, 116-176. 
Eight House, See House viii 
Electional Astrology, 5 
Eleventh House, See House xi 
Emotions. 46-49, 84, 85, 102, 114, 
118. 119, 123, 125. 126, 128. 
_135, 149. 170. Also see Tastes 
and Temperament. 
Enemies. 48, 49. 84, 85, 100, 101, 
106. 108, 110, 112, 114, 118, 
121, 125. 128-130, 133, 141, 
151-153. 160-162, 164-167, 169, 
171. 175 
Enmity of Planets, 71, 72 
Ephemeris. 2, 3, 12. 23, 25, 27-29, 
36, 38, 40-43 
Equator. 10, 14 
Equinoctical Degrees, 11 
338 Index 
Equinoxes, See Precession of 
Equinoxes 
Exaltation, degree 68, 69 - 
planets in 68. 
Even Signs, 58 
Eunuch, constellations 201 - 
planets 80. 81 
Female, constellations 201 - 
planets 80-81 - signs 58 
Fifth House, see House V 
First House, see House I 
Fixed signs, 59-planets in 179, 
180 
Fixed stars, 1, 10. Also see Con- 
stellations 
Fixed Zodiac, see Sidereal 
Flavour, 78 
Fortnight. 21-23 
Fourth House, see House IV 
Friends, 47, 102-104, 108, 114, 120, 
121, 126, 127, 132, 135. 136, 
145, 150, 152, 158, 161. 164-166. 
170 
Friendship among Planets, 71-73 
Gain, 121, 127. 128, 136. 138, 
140. 141. 149. 150, 165, 167, 
170, 172. 174. Also see Houses 
I, II. IV, VII, VIII, IX. X and 
XI and lords thereof 
Gemini, as ascendant 46 - 
attributes of 55-63 - benefics 
for 284 - Jupiter in 135 - 
Ketu in 145 - malefics for 284 
- Mars in 127 - Mercury in 
131 - Moon in 46, 123 - parts 
of body 53 Rahu in 145 - 
Saturn in 142 - Sun in 117 - 
Venus in 138 -- Also Sec 
Signs 
General Principles of Judgment, 
177-185 
Geocentric Longitudes. 13, 28, 29 
Great, enmity among planets 72, 
73 - friendship among planets 
72, 73 - years of planets 241 
Happiness. 47, 84. 85. 98, 101, 
104. 114, 120, 137, 139, 143, 
149. 152. 153, 158, 160, 161, 
167, 170, 172, 173, 175. Also 
see Yogas 
Health, 95, 101, 106, 109, 114, 
116. 127, 129. 150, 151, 153, 
156, 166, 170. 172. Also see 
Diseases and Yogas. 
Houses I and VI and lords 
thereof 
Herschel. 2 
Horizon. 13, 15, 33 
House, aspects on 177. 178 - 
cusp of 94 - definition of 16, 
91. 221 - division of 15, 91- 
94. 280 -- domain of 93 
position of 15 
Houses and. judgment 177-187, 
220 249. Also see Yogas 
karakas 87, 88 - lords - see 
Lords -- matters judged from 
95-115 - order and position 
15-17 - parts of body 54. 110- 
114 - planets in 149-176, 178 
signs, correlation with 15-18, 
91. 116. 145 - Yogas based on 
-see Yogas 
House I. judgment of 177-185. 
221-224 - Jupiter in 161, 222 
karaka for 87. 88 - Ketu 
in 172 - Mars in 155, 222 - 
matters judged from 95-96, 100. 
101, 114. 230 - Mercury in 
158. 222. Moon in 151. 222 - 
parts of body 54. 100. 101, 114 
planets in 178 - Rahu in 
169 - Saturn in 165, 222 - 
Sun in 149 - Venus in 163. 
222. Also see Yogas 
House II, judgment of 177-185. 
220, 224-226 - Jupiter in 161. 
224, 225 karaka for 87, 88 
Ketu in 172, 173, 224 - 
Mars in 155, 224 - matters 
judged from 97, 98. 101. 102. 
114. 220, 224 - Mercury in 
158, 224 - Moon in 152, 224 
parts of body 54. 101, 102, 
114 - planets in 178 - Rahu 
in 169. 170, 224. 225 - Saturn 
Index 339 
in 166, 224, 229 - Sun in 149, 
224 - Venus in 163, 224, 225. 
Also see Yogas 
House III, judgment of 177, 185, 
226, 227 - Jupiter in 161, 227 
karaka for 87, 88 - Ketu 
in 173 - Mars in 155, 226 - 
matters judged from 102, 103, 
114 - Mercury in 158, 226 - 
Moon in 152, 226 - parts of 
body 54, 102. 103, 114- 
planets in 178 - Rahu in 170, 
226 - Saturn in 166, 226 - 
Sun in 150, 226 - Venus 
in 164, 227. Also see Yogas 
House IV, judgment of 177-185, 
220, 227, 228 - Jupiter in 161 
karaka for 87, 88 - Ketu 
in 173 - Mars in 155, 156, 
228 - matters judged from 97, 
98, 103-105, 114, 220 - Mer- 
cury in 158, 159 - Moon in 
153 - parts of body 54, 104, 
114 - planets in 178 - Rahu 
in 170 - Saturn in 166, 227, 
242 - Sun in 150, 228 - 
Venus in 164. Also see Yogas 
House V, judgment of 177-185, 
228-230 - Jupiter in 162 - 
karaka for 87, 88 - Ketu in 
173, 230 - Mars in 156, 230 - 
matters judged from 105, 106, 
114 - Mercury in 159 - Moon 
in 153, 232 - parts of body 
114 - planets in 178 - Rahu 
in 170, 230 - Saturn in 167. 
230 Sun in 150, 230 - 
Vann in 164. Also see Yogas 
House VI, judgment of 177-185, 
230-232 - Jupiter in 162, 226, 
228 - karaka for 87, 88 - 
Ketu in 173. 231 - Mars in 
156, 226, 232 - matters judged 
from 106. 107, 1 14, 231 - 
Mercury in 160, 240 - Moon 
in 153 - parts of body 54, 105, 
54, 106, 114 - planets in 178, 
179 - Rahu in 170, 231 - 
Saturn in 167, 232 - Sun in 
150. 232 - Venus in 164, 228. 
Also see Yogas 
House VII, judgment of 177-185, 
232-236 - Jupiter in 162 - 
karaka for 87, 88 - Kett' in 
173. 174 - Mars in 156 - 
matters judged from 107-109, 
114 - Mercury in 159, 160 - 
Moon in 153 - parts of body 
54. 107-109. 114 - planets in 
178 - Rahu in 170, 171 - 
Saturn in 167, 227 - Sun in 
150. 233 - Venus in 164, 165. 
Also see Yogas 
House VIII, judgment of 177-185, 
220, 236-240 - Jupiter in 162, 
226, 228 - karaka for 87-88 
Ketu in 174-231 - Mars in 
156, 157, 224, 226 - Matters 
judged from 98, 109, 110, 114, 
220 - Mercury in 160, 228 - 
Moon in 153, 178, 224 - parts 
of body 54, 109, 110, 114 - 
planets in 178, 179 - Rahu in 
171, 231 - Saturn in 167 - 
Sun in 150, 224 - Venus in 
165. 224, 228. Also see Yogas 
House IX, judgment of 177-185, 
220, 240-242 - Jupiter in 162. 
163, 240 - karaka for 87, 88 
Ketu in 174, 240 - Mars in 
157, 240 -- matters judged 
from 99-111, 114, 220, 242 - 
Mercury in 159, 228 - Moon 
in 153, 240 - parts of body 
54, 110, 114 - planets in 178 
Saturn in 167, 240, 241 - 
- Rahu in 171, 227. 240, 24i 
Sun in 150, 151, 226, 240 - 
Venus in 165. 240'. Also see 
Yogas 
House X, judgment of 177-285, 
242-244 - Jupiter in 163 - 
karaka for 87, 88 - Ketu in 
174 - Mars in 157, 242 - 
matters judged from 99, 111, 
112, 114, -242 - Mercury in 
340 Index 
160 - Moon in 153, 154 - 
parts of body 54, 111, 112, 114 
- planets in 178 - Rahu in 
171 - Saturn in 167, 168, 244 
Sun in 151, 242 - Venus in 
165. Also see Yogas 
House XI, judgment of 177-185, 
220, 245-247 - Jupiter in 163 
karaka for 87, 88 - Ketu 
in 174, 175 - Mars in 157-227 
matters judged from 112-114, 
220 - Mercury in 160 - 
Moon in 154 - parts of body 
54, 112-114 - planets in 178 
Rahu in 171, 172 - Saturn 
in 168 - Sun in 151 - Venus 
in 165. Also Fee Yogas 
House XII, judgment of 177-185, 
247, 249 - Jupiter in 163, 226, 
228, 247, 248 - karaka for 87, 
88 Ketu in 175 - Mars in 
157, 226 - matters judged 
from 113, 1 14 - Mercury in 
160, 161, 228 - Moon in 155 
parts of body 54, 113, 114 - 
planets in 178 - Rahu in 172 
Saturn in 168 - Sun in 151 
Venus in 165, 228, 247. Also 
see Yogas 
Houses-Lords of, antardasha of 
see Antar - judgment of - 
see Planets in signs and 
houses - location of - see 
yogas - mahadashas of 
see Dasha - see also Lords of 
Houses 
Human signs, 61 
Humours of Body, 78 
Inauspicious Degrees of Moon, 
65, 67 
Incest, 86, 87 
Indian Standard Time, see Time 
Ingredients of Body, 76. Also see 
Body and its parts 
Ingresses of the Sun, 23 
Intercalary Month, 23 
Jewels and Planets, 80 
Judgment of, achievements 242 
actions 222, 242 - activity 
222 - agricultural land 228 - 
bodily vigour 223, 231 - bro- 
thers and sisters 226, 245 - 
business 242 - children 229, 
230, also see sons and daugh- 
ters - company 223 - com- 
plexion 224 - conveyances 227 
courage 227 - daring 223 
diseases 224-226, 228, 229, 
23 1, 232, 248 - digestive 
power 229 - education 228 -- 
eloquence 229 - enemy 23 1 
- energy 223 - environment - 
family 224 - father 243, 245 
food 225 - fortune and 
prosperity 240, 241 - friends 
227 - gain 245 - happiness 
228 - health 222, 231, 232 - 
honour 227 - hurt (bodily) 
222. 226, 227 - income 245 - 
intelligence 222, 228 - learn- 
ing 228 - living in places 223, 
232 - logical faculty 228 - 
longevity 236, 240 - low acts 
228 -- matrimonial affairs 232 
matrimonial happiness 233- 
235 also see wife - memory 228 
mother 227 - parts of body 
223 - personal efforts 242 - 
philanthropy 247 - political 
power 242, 243 - position 242 
poverty 243, 246, 247, - 
property 227 - religiousness 
240, 247 - respect 242, 243 - 
sedentary habits 223 - shyness 
229 - sons and daughters 225, 
231 - speech 224, 225, 228, 
229, 247 - spending 247, 248 
success 242 - victory 231 - 
wealth 224, 225 - wife/hus- 
band - appearance and 
temperament of 232 - har- 
mony with 233 - longevity of 
233-235 - separation from 
233 - set off of malefic in- 
fluences 234 - wisdom 222. For 
all kinds of judgment also see 
Index 341 
planets in signs and houses and 
Yogas. 
Judgment of Antardasha, see 
Antara. 
Judgment of Dasha, see Dasha 
Judgment of Houses, general 
principles 177-185 - House I 
221-224 - II 220, 224-226 - 
III 226-227 - IV 220, 227, 228 
- V 228-230 - VI 230-232 - 
VII 220, 232-236 - VIII 236- 
240 - IX 220, 240, 242 - X 
242-244 - XI 220, 245-247 - 
XII 247-249. For judgment 
Please also see Planets in signs 
and houses and Yogas. 
Jupiter in, houses 161-163 - 
signs 134-138 - yogas 194-205, 
208, 210, 212, 215 
Jupiter's, antardasha. see Antar 
Lagnam.butes of 75-89 - 
debilitation 68 - enemies 71- 
73 -exaltation 68 - friends 71-73 - 
mahadasha . see Dasha . 
Moola Trikona 71 - neutrals 
71-73 - signs 6A Also see 
Planets. 
Jupiter significator for, 84-89, 224, 
232, 244. 
Karaka, 84-88, 95, 164, 180-184, 
187, 188, 220, 221 
Karana, 24, 25, 3Q 31 
Ketu, conjoined with a planet 145, 
168, 172, 286 - what is 3. 
Ketu in, angle 168, 172 - any 
house 168, 172 - houses 172- 
173 - signs - see Aries, 
Taurus etc. trine 168 
Ketu's, antardasha see Antar 
characteristics - see Planets . 
mahadasha.see Dasha. 
Ketu significator for, 85 
Latitude, 2, 6, 7, 13, 18, 34, 67 
Lagnam, see Ascendant 
Lame signs, 60 
Leo, as "ascendant 47 - attributes 
of 55-63 - benefics for 284 - 
Jupiter in 135 Ketu in 145- 
malefics for 284 - Mars in 128 
- Mercury in 131, 132 - 
Moon in 47, 124 - parts of 
body 53 - Rahu in 145 - 
Saturn in 143 - Sun in 118, 
226 - Venus in 134. Also see 
Signs. 
Libra, as ascendant 48 - attribu- 
tes of 55-63, benefics for 284 
- Jupiter in 136 - Ketu in 
145 - malefics for 284 - Mars 
in 128 - Mercury in 132 - 
Moon in 24, 48 - parts of 
body 53 - Rahu in 145 - 
Saturn in 143, 144 - Sun in 
119 - Venus in 139, 140. Also 
see Signs. 
Local Time, 36 
Local Mean Time, 38-42 
Long signs, 62 
Longevity, 84, 85, 98, 101, 105, 
106, 109, 110, 114, 151- 158, 
156, 173, 
160, Dates .63, 167, 171 
Longitudes of Planets, 42, 43 
Lord of the House 181, 183, 184, 
221-224 - 1 180,183, 185, 188, 
225-227,230,231,241, 242, 245, 
246, 248 - II 185, 188, 224, 
225, 229, 245, 246 - III 185, 
188, 226, 246, - IV 185, 188, 
227, 228, 241, 245, 246 - V 
18225-227.227-229,243, 245, 246 
- VI 179, 185Karaka. 230, 231, 
246 - VII 188, 232, 233, 246 
- VIII 179, 185, 189, 229, 231, 
246 - IX 185, 188, 227, 241- 
243,245, 246 - X 185, 188, 
226, 245, 246 - XI 185, 198, 
226, 245, 246 - XII 179, 185, 
189, 224, 246-248 
Lordship of Signs, 64 
Loss, see House XII and lord 
thereof 
Lunar Ascendant, 184 
Lunar Dates, 20-23 
Lunar Months, 21 
Lunar signs, 63 
342 Index 
Mahadasha, see Dasha 
Male, costeltations 201 - planets 
80, 81 - signs 58 
Maraka 187, 188, 189 - See 
Houses I!, VI, VII, VIII and 
XII also lords thereof. 
Married Happiness, 84, 85, 107, 
108, 119, 131, 139, 143, 149 - 
151, 156, 158, 171, 232-235. Also 
see wife/husband 
Mars in, houses 155-157 - signs 
126-130 - yogas 190, 195, 197, 
199, 201 - 204, 207-210. 
Mars' antardasha - see Antar- 
attributes of 75-89 - debilita- 
tion 68 - enemies 68 - exalta- 
tion 68 - friends 71-73 - 
Mahadasha - See Dasha - 
Mool Trikona 70, neutrals 71-73 
signs 64. Also see Planets. 
Mars significator for, 84-89 
Matters Judged from Houses, 
95-115, 220-249 
Measures in Space, 2 
Mental Qualities, 46-49, 84, 85, 
97, 101, 102, KM-106, 111, 114, 
117-120, 123,124, 126, 131, 
133-136, 138, 139, 142,144, 149, 
150, 153, 155, 158, 159,161, 163, 
167, 169-171, 173, 174. 
Mercury in, houses 158-161 - 
signs 130-134 - yogas 194-195, 
197-199, 201-205, 214, 215 
Mercury's antardasha - see 
Antar-attributes of 75-89, de- 
bilitation 68 - enemies 71-73 - 
exaltation 68 - friends 71-73 
mahadasha - see Dasha - 
Moola Trikona 70 - neutrals 
71-73 - signs 64. Also see 
Planets 
Mercury significator for, 84-89, 
224, 244 
Meridian cusp, 37 
Metals and Planets, 79 
Mid-Heaven, 13, 15 
Mineral signs, 62 
Month, intercalary 23 
names of 21 • 
Moo! Trikona, 70 
Moon in, houses 151-155 - 
signs 122-126 - yogas: 194-200, 
203, 205, 208, 210, 215 
Moon's, adverse position 31, 32, 
65, 66, 178 - antardasha- 
see Antar - association 122, 
222, 231, 232 - attributes of 
75-89 - auspicious degrees 65 
- constellation position 7, 8, 
233 - debilitation 68 - ene- 
mies 71-73 - friends 71-73 - 
inauspicious degrees 65 - 
latitude 3 - mahadasha - 
see Dasha - Moola Trikona 
70 - motion 21 - neutrals 
71-73 - nodes 3, 47, 53 - 
pakshabala 225 - path 3 - 
strength 121, 122, 179 - sign 
49-51, 64, 184. Also see Planets 
Moon Significator for, 84-89 
Movable signs, 59 - planets in 
179,180 
Motion Backwards, 3, 11 
Nakshatra, see Constellations 
Name first syllable of and Moon- 
sign, 308 
Neptune, 2 
Night Births, 178 
Ninth House, See House 
Northern Declination, 10, 11 
Northern Latitude, 2, 3, 66 
Northern Node of Moon, 3, see 
Rahn 
Nutation, 11 — also see Preces- 
sion of Equinoxes 
Papa, see Papi 
Papi Planets, 82, 83, 89, 90, 186- 
188, 222, 231 
Par/Max, 28, 29 
Path of, earth 2, 14, 34 - planets 
2,3 
Patterns of Chart, 43-45 
Pisces, as ascendant 49 - attri- 
butes of 55-63, benefits for 285 
Jupiter in 137 - Ketu in 145 
Index 343 
130 Mercury in 134 - Moon 
in 49, 126 - parts of body - 
53 Rahu in 145 - Saturn in 
145 - Sun in 121 - Venus in 
141. Also see Signs 
Planets, age of 79 - antardashas 
of - see Antar - arohi 69, 187 
aspects of 73-75, 182 - 
avarohi 69, 187 - benefit 75, 
82-83, 89, 90, 177-179 -biped 
82-birds 82-caste of 81 - 
characteristics of 75-90 - 
colour of 78 - , combinations 
of - see yogas - combust 
181, 185, 187, 205, 210, 215; 224, 
228 - complexion of 76 - 
conjunction of 176, 181-183, 
187, 195, 196, 221 - crawling 
82 - debilitation 68, 71, 176, 
179, 184, 185, 216 - dhatu 82 
enemies interse 71-73 - 
exalted 68-69, 71. 176, 178 - 
effoots of - see Planets in 
Sign§ and Houses - friends in- 
terse4'371-73, 179 - glance of 77 
9eat enemies interse 71-73 
- great friends interse 71-73 
great years of 241 - how 
to put in houses 94 - in 
angles 178, 179, 182, 183 - in 
cadent houses 177 - in common 
signs 179, 180 - in enemy's 
house 176 - in fixed signs 
179, 180 - in friend's house 
176 - ingredients of body 76 
in houses 149-175 - in 
movable signs 179, 180 - in 
own house 176, 178 - in signs 
116-148 - in succedent houses 
179 - Jeeva 82 - karakas for 
84, 88 - longitudes of 42, 43 
mahadasha of - see Dasha 
malefics 75, 82, 83, 89, 90, 
177, 179, 233, 234 - Moola 
82 - Moo I Trikona 70 - 
neechabhilashi 69 - neu- 
trals interse 69 - owning two 
houses 183, 185 - papa 82, 
89, 224 - Also see Papi - 
path of 2 - quadruped 82 - 
retrograde 178, 179, 215 - 
rising both ways 82 - rising 
with back 82 - rising with 
front part 82 - sex of - 80, 
81, 227, 230, 247 - shubha 
82 - significators for 75-89 - 
tenanting own house 178 - 
transits of - see transits - 
uclichabhilashi 69 
Planets and, cloth 82 - constella- 
tions 251, 252 - deities 81 - 
directions 81 - directional 
strength 82 - elements 81 - 
flavour 78 - gunas 78 - 
humours ogs -body 78 - 
jewels 80 - manner of winning 
over 83 - metals 79 - order 
of mahadashas 250-253 - own 
house 64 - parts of body 76, 
231 - periods - see Dasha and 
Antar physical characteristics 
of 77 - places 80 - regions 
84 - relationship interse 71-73, 
179 - relations governed 81 - 
seasons 80 - signs, correlation 
with 53, 54, 1 16 - tempera- 
ment 77 - yogas - see Yogas 
Planets, latitude 2, 3 - longitudes 
42, 43 - path of 3 
Pluto, 2 
Pratyantar Dasha,303-305 
Precession of Equinoxes, 11, 12, 
25, 28, 29, 34, 35, 37, 42, 43, 
221 
Principles of Judgment, general 
177-185 - for eaeht house 220- 
249 
Property, 46, 47, 84, 85, 97, 98, 
101, 104, 105, 110, 114, 136, 
140, 150, 152, 153, 155, 156, 
158, - 160, 166, 168, 173 
Prosperity, 46-49, 84, 85, 97, 98 
101-105, 107, 108, 110, 113,_ 
114, 117-120, 122, 124, 127-134, 
137, 140-142, 144, 145, 149, 151, 
153-156, 158, 160, 161, 163' 
344 Index 
167, 169, 170, 172-174, 240, 241. 
Also see Yogas 
Quadruped, planets 8 2 signs 
61 
Rahu, in houses "168-172 - in 
signs 71 - in yogas 
What is 3 
Rahu's position, in angle 168, 172 
- in trine 168, 172 - in as- 
sociation 145, 168, 172, 286. 
Rahu's, antardasha - see Antar- 
Mahada^ha - see Dasha. 
Rahu significator for, 84, 86 
RAMC, 41 
Rank and Position, 48, 84, 85, 100, 
101, 104-106, 110, 111, 114, 118, 
119, 123, 126, 128-130, 132-136, 
138, 140-145, 150, 152, 154, 156, 
157, 159-162, 163, 165-168, 171, 
172, 174, 175. Also see Yogas 
Regions and, planets 84 - signs 
51 
Relations 170.ified by Planets, 84, 
85 
Relations, brother 46, 81, 84, 102, 
103, 111, 112, 121, 123, 132, 
140, 150, 152, 157, 158, 161, 
166-168. 170, 173 - children 95, 
123, 132, 134, 145, 152, 156, 
160, 162, 167 - daughter 46- 
48, 50, 84, 85, 114, 123, 152, 
154 - family 101, 102, - 
fathlll.8, 70, 81, 84, 95, 99, 100, 
102, 104, 105, 111-114, 117,114.,! 
20., 156-158, 162, 166, 168, 
170, 171, 174, 179 - husband 
see wife - mother 47, 81, 84, 
95, 102-104, 114, 123, 151, 155, 
161, 166, 168, 170, 173 - 
relations 46, 48, 95, 100, 101, 
103, 104, 106, 111-113, 117, 120, 
125, 129, 133, 138, 141-143, 
156-159, 164, 168, 170-173, 175 
- sister 46, 81, 84, 102, 103, 
111, 112, 150, 152, 158, 166 
170 - son 46, 47, 49, 50, 105, 
114, 120, 121, 124, 128, 129-132, 
134-136, 141-145, 149-150, 
152-154, 156,157,160, 161,. 164- 
168, 171, 174, 175 - • wife/ 
husband 47-49, 81, 85, 88, 99, 
100, 104, 105, 107, 108, 113, 
114, 121, 122, 123, 128, 159-1 
134, 141,150,156, 157- 62.. 
i64, 165, 167-170 
Relationship among Planets, natu- 
ral 71-73 - temporal 71-73 
Religiousness, 48, 103-106, 110- 
112, 114, 118, 125, 126, 130- 
132, 134-139, 144, 145, 150, 153, 
156,159,161-163, 169, 171, 174 
Religious Propitiation, 31, 32 
Reptile signs, 61 
Retrograde Planets, 66, 178, 179, 
216 
Revolution, I, 14, 18 
Right Ascension of the Meridian 
cusp, 37, 41 
Rising Sign, see Ascendant 
Rising Parts of, planets 82 - signs 
63 
Sagittarius, as ascendant 32, 48 
attributes of 55-63 — bene- 
fits for 285 - Jupiter in 136- 
137 - Ketu in 145 - male- 
fics for 285 - Mars in 129 - 
Mercury in 133 - Moon in 32, 
48, 125 - parts of body 53 - 
Rahu in 145 - Saturn in 144 
Sun in 119, 120 - Venus 
in 140. Also see Signs 
Saturn in houses 165-168 signs 
141-145 - in 169.s 194, 197, 
201-204 
Saturn's antardasha - see Antar 
debilitation 68 - enemies 
71168.- exaltation 68 - 
friends 71-73 - mahadasha 
see Dasha - Moola Trikona 
70 . neutrals 71-73 - signs 
64. Also see Planets. 
Rahu.n significator for, 84, 85, 244 
Scorpio, as ascendant 48 - 
attributes of 55-63 -- benefits 
for 284, 285 - Jupiter in 136 
Ketu in 145 - Malefics for 
Index 345 
284 - Mars in 128, 129 - 
Mercury in 132, 133 - Moon 
in 48, 124, 125 - parts of the 
body 53 - Rahu in 145 - 
Saturn in 144 - Sun in 119 - 
Venus in 140. Also see Signs 
Second House, see House H 
Seventh House, see House VII 
Sidereal, 1, 10 - longitudes 12, 
25, 28, 29, 35, 42, 43, 221 -- 
signs 10, 42, 224 - time 38, 
40 - zodiac 4. 10, 12, 28 
Signs, abode of 55, 56 - animal 
62 - appearance of 55 - 
ascending, see ascendant - 
attributes of 53-63 - biped 61 
blind 60 - castes of 58 
colours of 57 - commenc- 
ing degrees 66 - common 59, 
223 -"trawling 61 - deaf 60 
debilitation 64, 184, 185 - 
direction of 15, 16, 60 - 
diurnal 160 - duration of 14, 
15. 18, 33, 34 - even 58 - 
exaltation in 68 - fag end of 
66 - female 58 - fixed 59, 223 
human 61 - in opposition 
18 - interpretation of planets 
in 146-148 - lame 60 - long 
62 - lordship of 63, 64 - 
lunar 63 - male 58 — 
measure of 8 - mineral 62 - 
movable 59, 223 - names of 
8 - nocturnal 60 - odd 58 
peculiarities of 55, 56 - 
planets in 116-145 - properties 
of 5-5, 56 - quadruped 61 - 
reptile 61 - rising, calculation 
of 38-41 - rising, effects for 
see Ascendant - rising 
bothways 63 - rising with back 
63 - rising with read 63 - 
sectors of 66 - sex of 58 - 
short 62 - sign rising, what 
is 15 - solar 63 - tenanting 
Moon 51, 52, 184 - vegetable 
62 - waterless 59 - watery 
59. 61 - yogas involving 
signs - see yogas. 
Signs and, constellations 8, 9 -- 
degrees 9, 10, 66 - houses, 
interrelation with 15-18, 53, 
54, 91 - parts of body 53 - 
parts of country 57 
Sixth House, see House VI 
Southern Declination, 10,11 
Southern Latitude, 2, 66 
Southern Node of Moon, 3 - 
see Ketu 
Space, measurement in 2 
Standard Time, see Time 
Stellar Zodiac, see Sidereal Zodiac 
Succedent Houses, planets in 178 
Sun in, houses 149-151 - signs 
116-121 - in yogas 194-198, 
200, 203. 204, 207, 2.08, 215. 
Sunrise, 10, 13, 20, 35, 36 
Sun's, antardasha, See Antar - 
debilitation 68 - enemies 71- 
73 - exaltation 68 - friends 
71-73 - mahadasha - see 
Dasha - Moola Trikona 70 - 
motion 21 - neutrals 70-73 - 
path 1, 10 - sign 64. Also see 
Planets. 
Sun's Ingress, 23 
Sun Significator for, 84-89, 221, 
244 
Table of, antardashas 257, 258 - 
houses 37, 41, 42 . maha- 
dashas 251, 253-255 - preces- 
sion of equinoxes 321-323 
Tastes and Temperament 46-49, 
101-105, 95-114, 117-119, 124, 
126-128, 130, 132. 135, 136, 138, 
139, 141, 142, 149, 152, 159. 
160,164,166, 169 
Taurus, as ascendant 46 - attri- 
butes of 55-63 - benefice for 
284 - Jupiter in 134 - Ketu 
in 145 - malefics for 284 - 
Mars in 126, 127 - Mercury 
in 131 - Moon in 46, 123 - 
parts of body 53 - Rahu in 
145 - Saturn in 142 - Venus 
in 138 - Also see Signs. 
346 Index 
Tenth House, see House X 
Third House, See House III 
Tide, high and low 122 
Time, cycle of 19 - Greenwich 
Mean 29, 38. 39 - Indian 
Standard 39, 40 - local 36- - 
local mean 38, 40, 41 - of 
rising of signs 33, 34 - sidereal 
38, 40 - standard 38, 39, 40 - 
units of 27 
Transits, general principles 306- 
309 
Transit of, Jupiter 311, 312, 315, 
317 - Ketu 314, 315, 317 - 
mars 310, 311, 315, 317 - 
Mercury 311, 315, 317 - 
Moon 310, 315, 317 - 
Rahu 314. 315, 317 - Saturn 
312-315, 317 - Sun 309, 310, 
315, 317 - Venus 312, 315, 
317 
Transit of Planets, Judgment by 
name of the native 308, 309 - 
modification of influence 317- 
320 - special rules to judge 317- 
320 
Trine, planets in 178 - quality 
of 178 
Tropical, longitudes 28, 221 - 
signs 10, 42, 221 - zodiac 4, 
11, 12, 33, 35, 42, 43 
Tropic of Cancer 10, 11, 12 - 
Capricorn 10, 11, 12, 28 
Twelfth House, see House XII 
Vegetable signs, 62 
Venus in. houses 163-165 - signs 
138, 141 - yogas 194-200, 202- 
205, 210, 214, 215 
Venus, antardasha - seeAntar 
debilitation 68 - enemies 71- 
73 - exaltation 68 - friends 
' 71-73 - mahadasha - see 
Dasha - Moola Trikona 70 
neutrals 71-73 - signs 64. 
Also see Planets 
Venus Significator for 84-85, 232 
Virgo, as ascendant 47, 48, 229 
attributes of 55-63 - 
benefics for 284 - Jupiter in 
135. 136 - Ketu in 145 
malefics for 284 - Mars in 
128 - Mercury in 134 
Moon in 47. 48, 124, 229 
parts of body 53 - Rahu in 
145 - Saturn in 143 - Sun 
in 1 18, 229 - Venus in 139. 
Also see Signs. 
Wealth, see Prosperity 
Years, commencement of 21, 2.3 
cycle of 20 - different 
kinds of 19, 20 - lunar 20, 
23 - names of 20 - solar 20 
Yogas, (soli-lunar distances) 25, 
26 
Yogas involving aspects 194-196, 
198-201, 208-210. 211, 212 - 
constellations 201 - day births 
200, 201 - night births 200, 
201 - Saturday 208 - Tues- 
day 208 
Yogas involving Houses, I 193- 
195, 197-199, 203-205, 207-209, 
210, 212, 214. 215 - II 193- 
198, 208-210, 212, 214, 215 - 
III 194. 195, 198, 207, 210, 212, 
214 - IV 195, 197-199, 203, 
207, 208, 210, 212 - V 198, 
199. 203, 204, 207, 208, 210, 213 
VI 194, 195, 198, 207, 208, 
210, 211, 213, 215 - VII 194, 
197-199, 203, 204, 211, 213 - 
VIII 194, 195, 198, 199, 207, 
208, 211, 213, 215 - IX 195, 
198, 199, 203, 205, 207-209, 211, 
213, 214 - X 194, 195, 197-199, 
203-205, 207, 208, 211, 213, 
214- - XI 194, 195, 198, 207, 
208, 211, 214 - XII 193, 195, 
197-199, 207, 208, 211, 214, 215 
angles 195, 196,. 198, 199, 
202-204, 207, 208, 211, 214,215 
house positions 205, 206, 
210-211 - trines 195, 196, 203, 
204, 208, 211, 214, 215 
Yogas involving Lords of Houses 
of, 1195, 196, 200, 203, 208-210, 
Index 347 
212, 215, 217-219 - II 196, 
199, 208. 209, 210, 212, 214 
- Ill 209. 210, 212, 217 - IV 
195.208 210,212,215.217- 
219 - V 196.199. 208-210, 
213. 217-219 - VI 209, 210, 
211. 213. 215, 218 VII 208, 
209. 211. 213, 217-219 - VIII 
209. 211. 213, 215, 218 - IX 
195, 196, 199, 203, 209-211, 
213. 214. 215, 217-219 - X 
204. 208. 209, 211, 213, 214, 
215, 217-219 - XI 199, 208, 
209, 211, 214, 218 - XII 209. 
211, 214. 215 
Yogas involving Planets, benefics 
193- 195,197, 201, 205, 207, 210 
combust 210, 211, 215, 216 
conjunction of 195,196, 214 
directional strength 215 - 
Jupiter 194-205, 208, 210, 212, 
215 - Mars 194, 195, 197, 199, 
201-204, 207-209, 210 - malefic 
193, 197, 201, 211, 212, 215 - 
Mercury 194.195.197-199, 201- 
205, 214. 215 - Moon 194-200, 
203-205, 208. 210, 215 - 
papas 199. 215 - Rahu 195 - 
retrograde 215, 216 - Saturn 
194-197. 201-204 - strength of 
195, 196, 208 - Sun 194-198, 
200, 203, 204. 207, 208, 215 - 
Venus 194-200, 202-205, 207, 
210. 214, 215 
Yogas involving Signs, Aquarius 
194, 197, 201-203 - Aries 194, 
195, 197, 200-204 - Cancer 
194, 197 , 201-20 4 , 2 0 9 
Capricorn 194, 195, 197, 20Y, 
202, 204 - debilitation 195, 
209, 215, 216 - degrees in 
signs 194-198, 200, 202 - 
enemy's sign 196, 215 - 
exaltation 195-197, 199, 202- 
205, 208, 210, 211, 214, 215, 216 
- friend's sign 195, 202 - 
Gemini 194, 197, 201-209 
Leo 194-197, 201, 204,210 - 
Libra 194, 196, 197, 201-204, 
207, 210 - own sign 195, 197, 
199,201-204, 210, 212, 214 - 
Pisces 194,195,197, 200-204 - 
Sagittarius 194, 195, 197, 201, 
202, 204 - Scorpio 194, 197, 
201, 202, 209, 210 - Taurus 
194, 197, 199, 201-204 - 
Virgo 194, 196-198, 201-204. 
For Sanskrit names of yogas 
please refer to pages 329-334 
Zodiac, 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 10,17, 28, 
33, 42. 51, 52 
Zodiac, fixed 10, 12 - sidereal - 
see Sidereal, tropical - see 
Tropical 
Zodiacal Belt, 1 
Zodiac-Division of, in constella- 
tions 7, 8, 9 - in signs 9, 10 