I Vedic Astrology Series I 
Planets 
& 
Children 
K N RAo 
Vedic Astrology Series 
Planets and Children 
Copyright© K.N. Rao 
First Published 1993 
ISBN 81-900376-1-7 
Price: 
Rs. 120 S 21.95 £ 14 
Published by: 
S. Kumar and Associates 
32 Sarojini Devi Lane, Maqboolganj, Lucknow. 
Typeset and Designed by: 
Vision Wordtronic Pvt. Ltd. 
111 Eros Apartments, 56 Nehru Place, New Delhi-ll0019, India. 
Printed by: 
Everest Press 
E-49/8 Okhla Industrial Area, Phase II, New Delhi-110020, India 
Acknowledgements 
In writing this book which contains some of my fundamental 
reseatches, I remember deeply, my late mother, Smt. K Satasvani 
Devi, some of whose undisclosed reseatches have been made use 
of by me here. 
My thanks to Vinay Aditya, Rajeev Jhanji and Dr. KS. Charak 
for helping me in the quick production of the book. 
My deep-felt thanks to Mrs. Ratnam N eelakanthan and 
Mrs. Kanta Gupta, both Sanskrit scholars and Jyotish Vishatads 
for the interpretation of the codal names of the Saptamsha 
divisions. 
My thanks also to Mrs. Kusum Vidyaratna for the categories 
of children described in the Mahabharata and the story of 
Satyakama from the Chhandogya Upanishad. 
Sarita Malhotra, a student of Jyotish Vishatad (Hindi) typed 
out some pages of this manuscript and has helped me as few can. 
Dr. Dinesh KSharma has helped in indexing the book. 
The royalty from this book shall be collected by K Vijaylakshmi, 
wife of my youngest brother, K Subhas Rao for the Childrens' 
Education Fund. ' 
K.N. RAo 
Contents 
INTRODUCTION 3 
SECTION ONE 
Transit of Planets and Childbirth 
Chapter I Timing the Birth of Children - Replicable 
Astrological Techniques . ..... . .......... 5 
Chapter II Birth of Children through Transit 
of Planets-I. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 14 
Chapter III Birth of Children through Transit 
of Planets-II. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 21 
Chapter IV Birth of Children through Transit 
of Planets-III. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 29 
SECTION TWO 
Vimshottari Dasha and Childbirth 
Chapter V Timing the Birth of Children through 
Vimshottari Dasha ...... . . . ..... . ... . . 33 
SECTION THREE 
Childbirth : Some Complex Areas 
Chapter VI Entering the Complex Area: 
Theoretical . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 
Chapter VII The Complex Area: 
Practical Illustrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . .. 62 
Chapter VIII Astro- Medical Approach : 
Delayed Childjoirths ..... . .............. 77 
v 
Chapter IX Mishaps: Miscarriages .................. 100 
Chapter X Planets and Dr. B.V. Raman's 
Children ... '. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 108 
SECTION FOUR 
Childbirth : Some other Aspects 
Chapter Xl Blessings Assuring the Birth 
of Children . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 116 
Chapter XlI Interpretation of the Codal Names of 
the Lords of the Saptamsha divisions ..... 118 
Chapter XlII Categories of Children ................. 132 
Chapter XlV Childlessness: Astrological Causes 136 
SECTION FIVE 
Chapter XV The Final Conclusion : Predestination 1SS 
Check-list cum O1testionnaires . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 168 
Some Puzzles to be solved ......................... 170 
Index .......................................... 177 
About the Author 
K.N. Rao (Kotamraju Narayan Rao) - has been a prolific 
proponent of Vedic astrology as a super-science in the new age, 
in India as well as abroad. Deeply indoctrinated and immersed 
in the traditional knowledge of the subject through his revered 
mother, he is equally modern and innovative in his attitude and 
approach, reorganising astrology through discovering the old and 
extending its frontiers through studies and research according to 
the needs of the times. 
His first two books - The Science of Astrology and Applied 
Astrology - published a few years ago were pathfinders, with 
many political predictions made for most countries as well as for 
public men. His new work Successfol Techniques of Vedic Astrology 
has been published in the United States. His systematic work on 
the monsoons and weather, diseases and health, careers, etc., has 
drawn wide attention and proclaim. 
A Master of Arts in English literature, K.N. Rao, started his 
career as a lecturer in English, but soon was selected for the Indian 
Audit and Accounts Services of the Government of India. Mter 
holding many senior positions with the government, he retired 
from the position of Director General with the office of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
He now devotes all his time to Vedic astrology, by writing, 
teaching, guiding research students as well as counselling. The 
School of Astrology run under his guidance at the Bharatiya 
Vidya Bhavan, New Delhi, is making tremendous progress with 
many hundred students from elitist classes taught by sixteen 
teachers every year. He is also the Vice President of the Indian 
Council of Astrological Sciences. 
vii · 
He learnt astrology from his mother, K. Sarasvani Devi and 
the art of writing from his father, K. Rama> Rao; the founder 
editor of Jawaharlal Nehru's, The National Herald. 
Later, his mantra-guru, Swami Paramanand Saraswati and 
fyotish guru, Yogi Bhaskaranand asked him > to do original and 
fundamental researches in astrology which is a Vedic tradition 
since times immemorial. 
Books by K N Rao 
• Science of Astrology (1989) 
• Applied Astrology (1989) 
• Mandal Report X-Rayed (1990) 
• Chandra Shekhar, the Survivor (1990) 
• Ups and Downs in Career (1993) 
• Astrology, Destiny and the Wheel of Time (1993) 
• The Nehru Dynasty : 
Astro-political biographical portraits (1993) 
• Successful Predictive Techniques of Vedic Astrology (1993) 
(Passage Press, Utah, U.S.A.) 

Introduction 
3T~ ?I<tr qrq ~ I1jll'1<>11<6: ftlQ(>\)qjl ~q<'11<6 ~ m~ 
lfj'S'F<1T<6: ~ ~ ~ <Ii'furr <Ii'furr ftlQ<'1M 
b ~q(>\'jC/ll ~q<'11q;1 ~ <'1'j<6I'1i ~td'R1fl1IC;: f<mt ~~if1f.'a II 
Atha Trayo Vava Loka Manushyalokah Pitriloko Devaloka 
iii so ayam. Manushyalokah Putrenaiva Jayyo Nanyena 
Karmana Karmana Pitriloko. Vidyaya Devaloko Devaloko 
Vai Lokanam Shreshthas-tasmad-vidyam Prashansanti. 
BRIHADARANYAKA UPANISHAD. 1-16 
There are three ",orlds (lokas) in the planet we live on; the manushya loka (the world of mortals), the pitril oka (the world of rugher beings or manes) and devaloka (the world of gods). Ordinary persons whose entire existence centres round earning, eating, and procreating are called manushya; forsaking their desires, those who engage themselves in doing good to the world are called pitras; those who spread enlightenment in the world .. and become leaders of higher culrure are called devas. 
The manushya loka can be conquered through sons; so long as there are no sons, the manushya can deem rumself to be defeated; 
the pitriloka is conquered through karma; the pitris are always engaged in doing good to the world. The devaloka is conquered 
through vidya (or divine knowledge). Devas spread spiritual 
knowledge and do good to the world. It is for this reason that vidya is praised and the devaloka is the best of the lokas. 
In all traditional societies, particularly Asian societies, their deep ancient spirirual trunking about human life is done at four levels: the purely physical in wruch the human motivations are nidra (comforts) ahar (career) and maithuna (life's enjoyments). 
2 
Here there is no difference between man and animals. 
The second level is emotional when every event, birth, illness 
old age and death are gripping emotions of fears. To understand 
them, solve them and treat them human branches of knowledge 
like medicine, psychology, astrology and so many other subjects 
have been developed by man all through centuries. The third level 
is intellectual out of which are born all philosophies, from the 
greatest philOsophies of the Upanishads to ordinary ephemeral 
philosophies of the west which are based more on the processes 
of ratiocination than actual realisation of truth. The Hindu 
philosophies are based on actual 'seeing' of eternal truths which 
is why they are called darshan, not philosophy. 
The fourth level is purely spiritual which has been the pursuit 
of a tiny minority of people of all civilizations and all countries. 
In India, the great rishis combined all the four levels and the 
Indian civilization in the days of its glory was as uninhibited in 
its appreciation and understanding of sex motivations as of man's 
eternal quest for comprehending the meaning and purpose of 
human life. 
One of the answers to such search and questions is the need 
to continue the family tradition through sons, a sacrosanct 
tradition. Naturally, an Indian asks immediately after his marriage 
when and what type of children will he have, particularly, sons. 
These questions generally are the following : 
(a) When will the marriage take place? 
(b) When will children be born? 
(c) What will be the sex of these children? 
(d) Will the children be successful in their lives? 
(e) Will these children look after their parents in their old age? 
Then there are some other questions. 
(a) Is there childlessness in the horoscope of the male or the 
female or both? 
(b) Will there be delayed birth of children or total denial? 
(c) Will there be mishaps to children? 
3 
Answering all these questions through illustrated horoscopes 
will take a team effort by nearly ten astrologers and a period of 
five years. Yet a beginning must be made somewhere, scientifi­
cally, through illustrations. 
In this book many of the questions have been considered. They 
are : 
(a) Timing the birth of children, through transits of planets and 
Vimshottari mahadasha. 
(b) Birth of children after considerable delay. 
(c) Curses because of which there will either be childlessness or 
mishaps to children. 
(d) There is pre-destination - a question which can be 
answered if dependable reading from Nadi or Bhrigu Samhita 
is available. But do not get trapped by fraudulent Bhrigu 
readers. There is one spectacular evidence given in the book 
from Dr. B.V. Raman's Dhruva Nadi, about the author 
(K.N. Rao). This should convince all that there is pre­
destination. 
But this is a scientific monograph with replicable astrological 
techniques. 
October 12, 1993 
21 B Telegraph Lane 
New Delli; - 110001 
Inc}ia 
- K.N. RAo 

SECTION ONE : Transit of Planets and Childbirth 
CHAPTER ONE 
Timing the Birth of Children: 
Replicable Astrological Techniques 
This most scientifically replicable research ever to have appeared 
any where remains unchallenged. Inspite of my request to married 
astrologers to work more on it since an orthodox society would 
be able to use it most, no advances have been made. On the other 
hand, another astrologer reproduced it, without even acknow­
ledging it, in a so-called research in The Astrological Magazine, the 
same magazine in which these researches were published in 1985. 
The Astrological Magazine did not publish his further papers, as, 
it appears, this plagiarism was caught in time. 
Limitations of the earlier research 
However, the limitations of the earlier research must be pointed 
out. I t was based on the transits of planets only. Since such 
transits occur quite frequently, it might have been mi~construed 
by an immature astrologer as being indicative always of the birth .' 
of children. 
The purpose of that research was to show the genetical connections 
through four planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars and the Moon hetween 
the horoscopes of parents and children. It was shown, separately hy 
showing the planetary linkage hetween the fother and the child; then 
of the mother and the child; and finally hetween the parents and the 
child. 
The purpose of the research was more than fulfilled as it has 
been tried on many thousands of horoscopes and in not a single 
case it has failed. The replication is hundred percent. 
The limitation of the research was that it was not combined 
with the Vimshottari dasha periods, mahadasha and antardashas. 
6 
I was too busy with my office work to do it. Some other 
astrologers should have done it. But no one did it. 
This monograph, apart from including the 1985 published 
research, includes some other aspects of planets and children, a 
rather serious problem in orthodox societies everywhere in the 
world 
The additional pieces of tested research appended to the 
original published research are : 
(a) The use ofVimshottari dasha for timing the birth of children 
in normal cases first. 
(b) The use of Vimshottari dasha for the abnormal delay in the 
birth of the first child after marriage. 
This paper is once again a challenge to those physical scientists, 
who do not understand why astrology is a super-science and, why 
it has all the features of a physical science and something more, 
which is much greater than what any physical science can ever 
'have within its methodology. 
The first part which deals with transits of planets and child 
birth was published, without any horoscopic illustrations. Yet it 
was understood and appreciated. To make it easier for astrologers, 
the rules and horoscopic illustrations are being given here. After 
this the published papers may be read. 
Then the additional pieces appended can he followed. 
Illustrating the research through horoscopes of parents 
Rule One 
Saturn should have aspeeted the 
Ca) Fifth house, or 
(b) The fifth lord or 
Ce) The ninth house or 
Cd) The ninth lord 
within nine months of the birth of the child, through 
Ca) Direct motion or 
7 
(b) Retrograde motion, in which case it will give effects 
from the previous house also. 
Rule Two 
Jupiter also should have aspeeted like Saturn any of the four 
points mentioned above within nine months of the birth of the 
child. 
Rule Three 
Mars should have aspeeted any of the above given four points but 
within seventy five days. . 
Rule Four 
The Moon should have aspeeted any of the four above given 
points or the Lagna or the Moon of the parents but within 
seventy two hours. 
Illustration One: Prince Charles and Princess Diana 
Noting the transit of the four planets i.e., Saturn, Jupiter, Mars 
and the Moon at the time of birth of their two sons, Prince 
William and Prince Henry. 
PRINCE WILLIAM 
Saturn 
Saturn was retrograde in Virgo till June 18, 1982 so it will cover 
Leo from where it will act. 
8 
Jupiter 
6'58' 
~9on 
2"17' 
Ketu 
4'45' 
JUriter 1 40' 
~aturn (R) 4'25 
~~ 
Moon 7'8' 
1~~~3' 
Lagna 
Prince Charles 12'52' 
Nov. 14, 1948 Saturn London 
12'13' 
Mars Merc~ Venus 28'23' 15"26 
O~~~, 1K~~, 24'27' l' , 
Venus 
Sun 
17'22' 
2'9' Merc~r~ 9'46' 
Princess Diana 
July 1, 1961 Mars 
14:10 c.n1 8'55' 
R.a4~~ ('<;I)I,.(Mv~ 4' , 
("1""" 
\ 
1.,501.&' 
'''N: G. If'" a . It"" eL< 
Saturn 
5 
Venus6 . Lagna 
4 Mercury 7 1 Moon 
Ketu 10 Rahu 
Saturn (R) 
Jupiter 
11 10 Moon 
Ketu 
5 Mars 
4 Rahu 
Thus Saturn from Virgo, at the time of the birth of Prince 
William aspects the fifth house and the fifth lord and the ninth 
house also of the father, Prince Charles. 
In the case of Princess Diana, Saturn (retrograde) in Leo was 
transiting over her fifth lord, Mars. On the day of the birth of 
William, Saturn from Virgo was aspecting the ninth lord, the Sun 
of Princess Diana. 
Jupiter 
Jupiter was retrograde till June 28, 1982 in Libra and was 
therefore acting from Virgo also ana aspecting the ninth house 
of Prince Charles, the father. Jupiter in Libra was aspecting the 
fifth house, Aries and the ninth lord, the Sun in Gemini, of the 
mother, Princess Diana. 
Mars 
Mars >1<115 retrograde in Virgo till May 11, 1982, till forty days 
Venus 
Mercury 
Moon 
Prince Will.iarn
1 
June 21, 1982 
Ketu Jupiter 
Moon 
Rahu 
Prince Henrl 
Sept. 16, 1984 
Jupiter Mars Saturn Ketu 
Sun 
Rahu 
Saturn 
Mars 
Sun 
~ercury 
Venus 
Yen. Merc. 
3 Moon 
Sun 2 
Rahu 
5 
Sun 
4 
1 
10 
7 
Jupiter 
1 
4 10 
7 
9 
9 Ketu 
8 
before the birth of Prince William, which falls within our rule 
of seventy five days. 
Mars giving effects also from Leo was aspecring the fifth house 
and the fifth lord and the ninth house of Prince Charles, the 
father, and had transltted over the fifth lord, Mars of his mother, 
Diana. 
On the day 0/ the birth 0/ William, Mars was aspecting the ninth 
house 0/ his father and the fifth house 0/ his mother. 
The Moon 
The Moon was in Aries till June 19, 1982, in the fifth house of 
Diana, the mother, fulfilling the requirements of the seventy tWo 
hour rule. 
1,2. The Lagna is not known. North Indian chart is based on natural 
zodiac. 
10 
The Moon was in Taurus on the day of the birth of William 
aspeeting the fifth house and the fifth lord of the father, Prince 
Charles. 
PRINCE HENRY 
Prince Charles afid Princess Diana had another son Prince 
Henry, on September 16, 1984. The same set of rules are being 
applied to the horoscopes of the parents to prove their validiry. 
Saturn 
Saturn in Libra was aspecting the fifth house of Diana and the 
ninth lord, Jupiter, of Charles. 
Jupiter 
Jupiter in Sagittarius was aspecting the fifth house Aries of Diana 
and was on the ninth lord, Jupiter of Charles. 
Mars 
Mars in Scorpio was in the fifth house and on the fifth lord of 
Charles. 
Mars aspects the ninth lord, the Sun, of Diana. 
Till August 4, 1984 Mars was in Libra aspecting the fifth 
house of Diana; fulfilling the seventy-five day rule: 
The Moon 
The Moon of Henry is in Taurus from where it aspects the fifth 
house, Scorpio and the fifth lord, Mars of his father, Charles. 
About eight hours before the birth of Henry, the Moon was 
in Aries, the fifth house of Diana, the mother, fulfilling the 
seventy-two hour rule. 
Illustration two: The Nehru-Gandhis 
INDIRA GANDHI (November 19, 1917) 
Indira Gandhi's Saturn is in Cancer aspeeting the fifth lord of 
Nehru, Mars in Virgo. 
Her Jupiter is in Taurus aspecting both the fifth house, Scorpio 
and the fifth lord Mars in Virgo of Nehru. 
JawaharJal Nehru 
Ex~Prime Minister 
of India 
Jupiter Sun Mercury 
Ketu Venus 
Jupiter 
Indira Gandhi 
Ex~Prim e Minister 
of India 
Moon Daughter of 
JawaharW Nehru 
Venus Mercury 
Rahu Sun 
Rajiv Gandhi 
Ex-Prime Minister 
of India 
Ketu Fint Son of 
Indira Gandhi 
Rahu 
Lagna 
Moon 
Saturn 
Mars 
Kern 
Lagna 
Saturn 
Mars 
Saturn 
Rahu 
~~n;n erc. Yen 
Jupiter 
Mars 
Sun 8 
9 
Jupiter 
Kern 
Ketu 
Moon 
5 
g 2 
11 
11 
Her Mars is in Leo, from there it aspects the ftfth house of 
Nehru, Scorpio. 
Her Moon is in Capricorn from where it aspects both the 
Lagna and the Moon of her father, Nehru. 
12 
Rahu 
Saturn 
Sanjay Gandhi 
Second son of 
Lagna Indin Gandhi Moon 
Sun Jupiter Mars Ketu 
Mercury Venus 
Moon Ketu Venus 
Mars Maneka Gandhi Lagna 
Wueof 
Sanjay Gandhi Sun 
Jupiter 
Saturn Mercury Rahu 
Venus 
Sun 
Mercury Varun Gandhi Ketu Son of Mars (R) 
Moon 
Sanjay Gandhi Rahu 
Jupiter 
Lagna Saturn 
(R) 
RAJIV GANDHI (August 20, 1944) 
8 
9 Lagna 
7 
Moon 10 4 
1 
Jupiter 
Venus 
arc 
Saturn of Rajiv Gandhi, the first son of Indira Gandhi, ,is in 
Gemini from where it aspects his mother's fifth lord, Mars in 
Leo. 
13 
Rajiv Gandhi's Jupiter is in Leo, on the fifth lord of his mother. 
Rajiv Gandhi's Mars is in Virgo from where it aspects the ninth 
house, Pisces of his mother. On August 18 Mars was in Leo from 
where it aspected the fifth house, Scorpio of his mother and was 
also on the fifth lord, Mars, in Leo. 
The Moon of Rajiv Gandhi in Leo is on the fifth lord of his 
mother. 
SANJAY GANDHI (December 14, 1946) 
In the case of Sanjay Gandhi, the second son of Indira Gandhi, 
Saturn was in Gemini till June 8, 1946 aspecting the fifth lord, 
Mars of his mother in Leo, fulfilling the nine month rule. Saturn 
was retrograde in Cancer till November 21, 1946 giving effect 
also from Gemini. 
Jupiter was in Virgo till August 17, 1946 fulfilling the nine 
month rule by aspecting both the ninth house, Pisces and the 
ninth lord, Jupiter in Taurus, of his mother. 
VARUN GANDHI (March 13, 1980) 
Saturn in Virgo (retrograde) was in the ninth house of his father, 
Sanjay Gandhi and aspected the ninth lord, Mercury. 
From Virgo, Saturn aspects the fifth house, Scorpio of his 
mother. 
Jupiter (retrograde) in Leo was aspecting the fifth lord of his 
mother, Mars which is in Aquarius. Jupiter was in Cancer till 
August 19, 1979 aspecting the ninth lord, Mercury of Sanjay 
Gandhi, in Scorpio, fulfilling the nine month rule. 
Mars in Leo aspects his mother's fifth house, Scorpio and fifth 
lord Mars, in Aquarius. Mars is on ninth lord Jupiter and aspects 
the ninth house of his mother. Mars in Leo aspects the ninth lord 
Mercury of his father. Being retrograde, it will give effect also 
from Cancer, from where it aspects the fifth lord Venus in Libra 
of his father. 
The Moon of Varun Gandhi is in the Lagna of his father, 
Capricorn and aspects the Lagna of his mother, Cancer. 
CHAPTER TWO 
Birth of Children through 
Transit of Planets - I 
Said that old Brahmin I have talked of, with a sense of gratitude, 
1 
"No child in this world is born unless both Saturn and Jupiter have 
blessed. « When I had told my late mother about this, she not 
merely agreed but proved it to me. She was excellent in two areas: 
marriage of girls, children and prashna (horary). My mother was 
Goddess Saraswati, the Vedic goddess of learning, incarnate to 
me. She gave me the following instructions : 
(a) Saturn and Jupiter must have aspected the 5th lord or the 
5th house within say one year of the birth of the first child 
or for that matter any child. She had learnt it from an Andhra 
Brahmin ofMasulipatnam 60 years ago and what I described 
as principles of Maharshi Bhrigu is known as Nadi principle 
in South India. Both are the same. The method is foolproof. 
(b) But before applying this, detect cases of childlessness individu­
ally and collectively in the horoscopes of the couple concerned. 
Without that the/ W"hole exercise is meaningless. My mother 
taught me two methods which appeared foolproof to me in 
eighty percent cases. A separate paper already prepared by me 
on astrological combination for childlessness will demon­
strate the validity of the astrological claim of Hindus that 
they beat do~rs outtight in detecting cases of childlessness. 
(c) My mother insisted on the examination of the Navamsha, 
the Saptamsha and the mahadasha after applying the snap­
shot method. But in this paper, I am cotifining myself to the 
snap-shot method only.' . 
1. Refer to my book, Ups and Downs in Career. 
2. The use of the 'Saptamsha and the mahadasha has been included in this book. 
15 
The purpose of my writing this paper is to stun in silence 
scientist& ridiculing astrology, and astrologers. 
. The statement signed by 186 Nobel Prize winners in U.S.A. 
against astrology has done no damage to Vedic astrology but has 
damaged the reputation of Nobel laureates who expressed an 
opinion on a subject not known to them. But since to some extent 
it has influenced the thinking ofIndia's young scientists and, has 
given to that ridiculous group of men like Kovoors and 
Narasimhiahs,' who call themselves rationalist, a blunt weapon 
for use against religion and astrology. I thought it worthwhile to 
give nearly a 100 examples, including famous men and women, to 
prove my point. 
The paper is supported by ten illustrations and three tables and 
it may be seen that the evidence is statistically sound and 
astrologically precise and convincing. 
Table I 
Planetary Relationship : Father and Son 
Lal Bahadur Shastri, ex-Prime Minister: (a) Lagna (9), 5th 
house (1), 5th lord (5). (b) On April 9, 1936 when a son was born 
to him, Saturn was aspecting his 5th lord and Jupiter 5th house. 
C.L. Nanda, former Home Minister: (a) Lagna (1), 5th house 
(5), 5th lord (3). (b) In 1919 when a child was born to him, Saturn 
was in his 5th house and Jupiter on his 5th lord. 
Charan Singh, ex-Prime Minister: (a) Lagna (9), 5th house (1), 
5th lord (6). (b) On September 14, 1927 when a son was born 
to him, Jupiter was aspeeting his 5th lord and Saturn aspeeting 
his 5th house. 
C.P.N Singh, Former Minister in Central Cabinet: (a) Lagna 
(11), 5th house (3), 5th lord (11). (b) On April 25, 1964, Saturn 
was on his 5th lord and Jupiter was aspeeting his 5th house. 
B. C. Johri, Judge, Allahabad High Court: (a) Lagna (7), 5th 
house (11), 5th lord (6). (b) On July 31, 1950 when his first 
daughter was born, Saturn aspeeted his 5th lord and was later in 
his 5th house while Jupiter was also in the 5th house. 
B.P. Poddar, Business magnate: (a) Lagna (7), 5th house (11), 
3. Self styled rationalists. 
16 
5th lord (5). (b) On December 25,1942, both Jupiter and Saturn were aspecring his 5th house when a son was born to him. 
Morarji Desai, ex-Prime Minister: (a) Lagna (3), 5th house (7), 5th lord (10). (b) On May 16,1926 when his son, Kanri Desai, was born, Saturn was in his 5th house and Jupiter was on the 5th lord till April 18, 1926. 
Dr. C.G. Pande, Academician: (a) Lagna (4), 5th house (8), 5th lord (4). (b) On August 22, 1951 when a daughter was born to him, Jupiter was aspecting his 5th lord and Saturn was aspecting his 5th house. 
C.M., lAS., Rajasthan Cadre: (a) Lagna (2), 5th house (6), 5th lord (6). (b) On October 7, 1960, Saturn was aspecting his 5th house and Jupiter was advancing into his 9th house which is the alternate house for children. 
M. CA., Railway Officer: (a) Lagna (9), 5th house (1), 5th lord (3). (b) On August 7, 1982 when his first daughter was born, Saturn was aspecting his 5th lord and Jupiter was aspecting both his 5th lord and 5th house. 
P. Malviya, Agricultural Engineer: (a) Lagna (10), 5th house (2), 5th lord (7). (b) On October 26, 1983 when a son was born to him, Saturn was on his 5th lord and Jupiter after transiting over the 5th lord was aspecting the 5th house. 
A. Kaicker, Businessman of Delhi : (a) Lagna (9). 5th house (1), 5th lord (12). (b) On April 22, 1983 when a son was born to him, Saturn was aspecting his 5th house and Jupiter aspecting his 5th lord. 
Pawan Kumar, 1.1. T., Delhi: (a) Lagna (7), 5th house (11), 5th lord (3). (b) In 1974 when a daughter was born to him, Jupiter was in his 5th house and Saturn on his 5th lord. . 
Kuldip Jain : (a) Lagna (11), 5th house (3), 5th lord (1). (b) In early 1977 when a child was born to him, Saturn was aspecting his 5th lord and Jupiter was in his 5th house. 
Dangwal, 1.P.S. Madhya Pradesh Cadre: (a) Lagna (12), 5th house (4), 5th lord (7). (b) In September 1973, when a child was born to him, Jupiter was aspecting his 5th house and Saturn till June 10, 1973, from Taurus was aspecting his 5th house. 
17 
Table II 
Planetary Relationship : Mother and Child 
Mrs. N Aggarwal, Delhi: (a) Lagna (6), 5th house (10), 5th 
lord (8). (b) On February 18,1981, when a child was born to her, 
Saturn was aspecting her 5th lord and Jupiter her 5th house. 
Mrs. S. Bhallari, Delhi: (a) Lagna (7), 5th house (11), 5th lord 
(2). (b) On July 7, 1967 when a child was born to her, Saturn 
was aspecting her 5th house and Jupiter, till August 1966, was 
aspecting her 5 th house. 
Mrs. M.B.R., Delhi: (a) Lagna (12), 5th house (4), 5th lord 
(7). (b) On August 26,1955, Saturn was on her 5th lord aspecting 
her 5th house while Jupiter was in her 5th house. 
Mrs. M. Saxena, Delhi : (a) Lagna (6), 5th house (10), 5th lord 
(5). (b) On November 22, 1977 when a child was born to her, 
Saturn was on her 5th lord and till July 18, 1977, Jupiter was 
aspecting her 5th house. 
Mrs. Lakshmi : (a) Lagna (3), 5th house (3), 5th lord (6). 
(b) On October 7, 1969 when a child was born to her, Jupiter 
was on her 5th lord while Saturn who till March 9, 1969 aspected 
her 6th lord was now aspecting her 5th house. 
Mrs. K Mehta: (a) Lagna (8), 5th house (12), 5th lord (4). 
(b) On August 19, 1981 when a child was born to her, both Saturn 
and Jupiter were aspecting her 5th house. 
Mrs. P. Mehra : (a) Lagna (5), 5th house (9), 5th lord (3). 
(b) On December 31, 1981 when a child was born to her, both 
Saturn and Jupiter were aspecting her 5th lord. 
Mrs. Indu Sharma: (a) Lagna (12), 5th house (4), 5th lord (11). 
(b) On January 29, 1978 when a child was born to her, Saturn 
by that time had covered both her 5th lord and 5th house from 
Cancer till September 8,1977 and Jupiter from Gemini aspec'ted . 
her 5th lord. ..:'> 
Mrs. Usha Anand: (a) Lagna (9), 5th house (1), 5th lord (5). 
(b) On October 30, 1969 when a child was born to her, Jupiter 
was on her 5th lord aspecting her 5th house and Saturn was in 
her 5th house till October 31, 1968. 
Mrs. K Shukla: (a) Lagna (8), 5th house (12), 5th lord (11). 
(b) On September 9, 1967 when a child was born to her, Saturn 
was in her 5th house, Jupiter was aspecting her 5th house. 
18 
A Rajmata : (a) Lagna (3), 5th house (7), 5th lord (5). (b) In 
1945, when a son was born to her, Saturn was aspecting her 5th 
lord and Jupiter was on her 5th lord itself. 
A divorced woman: (a) Lagna (5), 5th house (9), 5th lord (9). 
(b) When a daughter was born to her in 1945, both Saturn and 
Jupiter were aspecting her 5th lord and 5th house. 
Mrs. S.M.: (a) Lagna (8), 5th house (12), 5th lord (1). (b) On 
May 21, 1963 when a child was born to her, both Saturn and 
Jupiter were ·aspecting her 5th house. 
Table III 
Planetary Linkage : Parents and Children 
So far it has been shown that there is an inextricable planetary 
relation between the horoscope of child and its father, even if it 
is examined without considering the mother's horoscope. Simi­
larly, if the mother's horoscope alone is taken up again the same 
planetary relationship can be seen. 
Now instances, that are being given, will show that the child's 
horoscope clearly establishes planetary relations with both parents, 
mother and father simultaneously. As usual, some of the examples 
are those of well-known personalities. 
K C. Pant, Central Minister: (a) Lagna (6), 5th house (10), 5th 
lord (9). 
Mrs. K C. Pant: (b) Lagna (9), 5th house (1), 5th lord (1). 
(c) On June 29, 1959, when the first son was born to the Pants, 
Saturn was on the 5th lord of the father and in the Lagna of the 
mother while Jupiter aspected the 5th house and 5th lord of the 
mother and the 9th of the father. 
Natwar Singh, Central Minister: (a) Lagna (6), 5th house (10), 
5th lord (9). 
Mrs. Natwar Singh: (b) Lagna (7), 5th house (11), 5th lord 
(1). (c) On August 26, 1968, when a child was born to them, 
Saturn was aspecting 5th house of the father and 5th lord of the 
mother while Jupiter was aspecting the 5th lord of the father and 
the 5th lord and 5th house of the mother. 
Krishna Kant,Janata Leader: (a) Lagna (7), 5th house (11), 5th 
lord (8). 
Mrs. Krishna Kant: (b) Lagna (5), 5th house (9), 5th lord (8). 
(e) On June 17, 1960 when their first son was born, Saturn was ' 
19 
aspecting the 5th house of the father and was in the 5th house 
of the mother while Jupiter had just transited over the 5th lord 
of both parents. 
Dr. R.K. Caroli, Cardiologist: (a) Lagna (2), 5th house (6), 5th 
lord (5). 
Mrs. Caroli: (b) Lagna (2), 5th house (6), 5th lord (7). (c) On 
December 28, 1963, when a child was born to them, Saturn 
aspected the 5th lord of the mother and after aspecting the 5th 
house of the father had moved into the 9th house while Jupiter 
aspected the 5th house of both parents. 
Col. HN. Singh: (a) Lagna (9), 5th house (1), 5th lord (12). 
Mrs. Singh: (b) Lagna (8), 5th house (12), 5th lord (6). (c) On 
August 26, 1960, when their famous daughter, Shiraz Shahid, 
National Golf Champion, was born, Jupiter aspected the 5th 
house of both parents and at the time of birth of Shiraz was 
aspecting the 9th house of the mother while Saturn was aspecting 
the 5th lord of the mother and was in the Lagna of the father. 
M., lA.S. (UP. Cadre): (a) Lagna (4), 5th house (8), 5th lord (5). 
Mrs. M., lA.S. (UP. Cadre): (b) Lagna (3), 5th house (7), 5th 
lord (11). (c) On December 14, 1974 when a child was born to 
them, Saturn and Jupiter were aspecting the 5th lord of the father 
while Jupiter was on the 5th lord of the mother and Saturn, till 
June 1973, had aspected the 5th lord of the mother. 
M.C.]., Archaeological Survey tflndia: (a) Lagna (7), 5th house 
(11), 5th lord (10). 
Mrs. M.C.]. : (b) Lagna (5), 5th house (9), 5th lord (11). 
(c) On September 6, 1964, when a son was born to them, Saturn 
was in the 5th house of the father and the 5th lord of the mother 
and Jupiter was aspecting the 5th lord of the father and till August 
29, 1964 had aspected the 5th house of the mother. 
K. V.R., my brother: (a) Lagna (12), 5th house (4), 5th lord' 
(2). . 
Mrs. K. V.R. : (b) Lagna (12), 5th house (4), 5th lord (2). 
(c) On September 9, 1972 when a daughter was born to them, 
Saturn was on the 5th lord of both parents aspecting the 5th house 
while Jupiter had aspected the 5th lord and 5th house of both 
parents till January 6, 1972. 
K.S.R., my brother: (a) Lagna (3), 5th house (7), 5th lord (3). 
Mrs. K.S.R. : (b) Lagna (9), 5th house (1), 5th lord (4). (c) On 
20 
March 22, 1975 when first son was born to them, Saturn was in 
the 5th house of the father and was nearest to the 5th lord on 
which it transited three months later while Jupiter aspeeted the 
5th house and 5th lord of the father till February 20, 1975 and 
was aspecting the 5th lord of the mother. 
Anand: (a) Lagna (3), 5th house (7) 5th lord (10). 
Mrs. Anand: (b) Lagna (9), 5th house (1), 5th lord (5). (c) On 
October 30, 1969 when a child was born to them, Saturn was 
aspeeting the 5th house of the father and was in the 5th house 
of the mother while Jupiter was aspecting the 5th lord of both 
parents and in addition the 5th house of the mother. 
V:, lAS., Karnataka Cadre: (a) Lagna (2), 5th house (6), 5th 
lord (7). 
Mrs. v: : (b) Lagna (7) 5th house (11), 5th lord (1). (c) On 
April 29, 1964 when a son was born to them, Saturn was on the 
5th lord of the mother while till January 27, 1964, Saturn had 
aspeeted the 5th lord of the father and Jupiter was aspeeting the 
5th lord of the father and was in the 5th house of the mother. 
Col PM. Lokande: (a) Lagna (7), 5th house (11), 5th lord (11). 
Mrs. Lokande : (b) Lagna (11) 5th house (3) 5th lord (1). 
(c) On January 12, 1961 when child was born to them, Saturn 
was aspeeting the 5th house and 5th lord of the father and 5th 
house of the mother while Jupiter was aspeeting the 5th lord of 
the mother and 9th house of the father. 
C.M. Tripathi, Railways, Gorakhpur: (a) Lagna (8), 5th house 
(12), 5th lord (1). 
Mrs. Tripathi: (b) Lagna (9), 5th house (1), 5th lord (12). 
(c) On April 11, 1956, when a child was born to them, Saturn 
was aspeeting the 5th lord of the father and the 5th house of the 
mother while Jupiter aspeeted till November 1955 the 5th house 
of the father and 5th lord of the mother. 
Y.N Gupta, Election Commission, Delhi : (a) Lagna (5), 5th 
house (9), 5th lord (4). 
Mrs. Gupta: (b) Lagna (4), 5th house (8), 5th lord (7). (c) On 
December 12, 1953 when their first daughter was born, Saturn 
was aspecting the 5th house of the father and was on the 5th lord 
of the mother while Jupiter aspeeted the 5th house of the father 
till November 29, 1953 and aspeeted alternatively the 5th house 
and the 5th lord of the mother. 
CHAPTER THREE 
Birth of Children through 
Transit of planets -II 
Often, during my transfers from one station to another, I have 
heard stories about the legendary reputations of astrologers who 
had predicted very correcdy the week of the birth of a baby while 
the doctor too, making his own calculations based on medical 
examination, arrived more or less at the same conclusion. 
But astrology, being a supra-science, is a much higher 
discipline than any science known to mankind. Since often these 
days this statement has provoked derision, let me illustrate this 
in a practical way. 
My mother's predictions about the birth of a baby seemed, to 
some, to border on the miraculous. Let me, therefore, continuing 
the theme, outline her theory as I picked up very imperfecdy from 
her working sheets. 
My piecing together fragments I picked up from my mother's 
research, may help astrologers interested in predicting about 
children, carry it to a level of perfection, removing the many 
chinks that may exist, in an otherwise coherent pie.c~ of research. 
Pre-natal horoscope 
I do not know anything about how she worked on pre-natal 
horoscope. She correlated this to the transit of Saturn and Jupiter 
and their aspects on the 5th house and the 5th lord to pinpoint 
the year 0/ the birth 0/ a baby, I have already discussed this in the 
previous article. 
Mars 
Then she worked on the transit of Mars to arrive at the month 
of the birth of the baby, I guess. 
22 
(a) Mars must aspect the 5th house or the 5th lord or the 9th 
house or the 9th lord of the mother when the 9th month of 
pregnancy is nearing (Kshetra principle)'. 
(b) Similarly, Mars must aspect the 5th house or the 5th lord 
or the 9th house or 9th lord of the father (Beeja principle)'. 
(c) When all the above factors are about to be completed, Mars 
must be deemed to have accomplished his task. Let this be 
illustrated thus by taking the horoscopes of Sanjay Gandhi 
(father), Maneka Gandhi (mother) and Varun Gandhi (son). 
On June 18, 1979, Mars entered Cancer, the Lagna of Maneka 
Gandhi and aspected the Lagna of Sanjay Gandhi. But more 
important, Mars aspeeted the 5th lord of San jay Gandhi in Libra. 
On November 7,1979, Mars entered Leo and started aspecting 
the 5th house and the 5th lord of Maneka Gandhi. 
The Sun 
On June 18, 1979, when Mars had aspected the 5th houses of 
both, Sanjay and Maneka, the Sun was in Gemini from where 
he would take nine months to enter Aquarius. 
Like Mars, the Sun too must touch the 5th house or the 5th 
. lord or the 9th house or the 9th lord of both the parents. None 
of these factors can be left out. Here comes in my imperfection. 
Astrologers may improve upon it. 
The Month 
On the basis of the Sun and Mars, the month of birth of the 
baby is arrived at thus : 
The Moon 
Now the week or the day of the birth of the child can be predicted 
on the basis of the following : 
At birth or a day or two before its birth the Moon of the new­
born will invariably be either : 
(a) in the Lagna of the father or the mother; or 
(b) on the 5th lord or the 5th house or the 9th lord or the 9th 
house of the mother or the father; or 
1. The female is kshelTa (field) while the male is the beda (seed). 
23 
(c) sometimes the Moon-sign of one of the parents. 
Some one can perfect it, as my late mother did, and predict 
the day of the birth of the child including its birth-nakshatra. 
The purpose of writing this article will have been served 
substantially in showing how accurately this applies to the same 
data as I used in the previous chapter. 
Table I 
Father-Child: Martial Bond 
It will first be shown how Mars connects the child and the father. 
In the twelve cases below, it will be seen how Mars of the child 
influences the 5th house and 5th lord of the father. 
(i) Mr. La! Bahadur Shastri: On April 9, 1936, when a child 
was born to Mr. Shastri, Mars was in Aries in his 5th house. 
(ii) Mr. Charan Sb;gh : On September 14, 1927, when a child 
was born to Mr. Charan Singh,. Mars was in Virgo, on the 
5th lord of Mr. Charan Singh aspecting his 5th house also. 
(iii) Mr. G.P.N Singh: On April 25, 1964, when a child was 
born to Mr. C.P.N., Mars from Pisces was aspecting his 5th 
house. Till the middle of March 1964, Mars was on the 5th 
lord of the father. 
(iv) Mr. B.C. Johiri: On July 31, 1950, when his first child was 
born, Mars was in Vigro on the 5th lord of the father. 
(v) Mr. B.P. Poddar: On December 25, 1942, when a child 
was born to him, Mars was in Libra, the ascendant of the 
father having, till September 6, 1942, been on the 5th lord 
of the father from where he aspected the 5th house as well. 
(vi) Mr. Mormji Desai: On May 16, 1926, when a son (Mr. 
Kanti Desai) was born, Mars was in Aquarius though till 
April 18, 1926 he was on the 5th lord of the father. 
(vii) Mr. C.G. Pande: On August 22,1951, Mars was in Cancer 
on the 5th lord of Mr. Pande when a daughter was born to 
him. 
(viii) Mr. C.M., lAS. : On October 7, 1960, Mars was in Vigro 
aspecting the 5th h,l'Jse and the 5th lord of Mr. C.M. when 
a daughter was born to him. 
24 
(ix) M. GA. (Railways) : On August 7, 1982, when a daughter 
was born to him, Mars from Libra aspected his 5th house. 
(x) Mr. Malviya: On October 26,1983, a child was born to him, 
Mars aspected his 5th lord till September 19, 1983, from 
Cancer. . 
(xi) Mr. A. Kaicker : On April 22, 1983, when a son was born 
to him, Mars was in Aries, the 5th house of A. K. 
(xi) Mr. Dangwal, I.P.S.(M.P.) : In September 1973, when a 
child was born to him, Mars aspected his 5th house and 5th 
lord from Aries. 
Table II 
Mother-Child: Martial Bond 
As in the case of the father, so in the case of the mother, it can 
be seen in eleven cases given below how Mars of the child 
influences the 5th house or the 5th lord of the mother near-about 
the day of its birth. 
(i) Mrs. Agarwal: On February 18, 1981, a child was born to 
her, Mars, in Capricorn till January 29, 1981, was aspecting 
her 5th house. 
(ii) Mrs. Kaley: On December 7, 1966, a child was born to her, 
Mars from Leo had aspected her 5th housec'1ill November 
21, 1966. 
(iii) Mrs. Bhakri: On July 7, 1967, child was born to her. Till 
July 5, 1967, Mars from Leo aspected her 5th house. 
(iv) Mrs. M.B.R. : On August 26, 1955, child was born to her. 
Till August 17,1955, Mars was in her 5th house, aspecting 
h~r 5th lord. 
(v) Mrs. Saxena: On November 22,1977, when a child was born 
to her, Mars from Cancer was aspecting her 5th house. 
(vi) Mrs. Lakshmi: A child was born to her on October 7,1969. 
Till February 1969, Mars was in her 5th house. 
(vii) Mrs. I.K Mehra : A child was born to her on August 19, 
1981. Till May 1981, Mars from Aries aspeeted her 5th lord 
in Cancer and was in Cancer on the day the child was born. 
25 
(viii) Mrs. Indu Sharma: On January 29, 1978, when a child was 
born to her, Mars was in Cancer, her 5th house. 
(ix) Mrs. Usha Anand: On October 30, 1969, when a child was 
born to her, Mars was in Capricorn aspecting both her 5th 
house and 5th lord. 
(x) Mrs. K Shukla: On September 9, 1967, when a child was 
born to her, Mars was aspecting her 5th lord. 
(xi) Mrs. S.M. : On May 21, 1963, when a child was born to her, 
Mars from Leo was aspecting her 5th house. 
Table III 
Parents-Child: Martial and Lunar Relation 
To recapitulate, it has been shown how without the blessings of 
Saturn and Jupiter, no child can ever be born. Only treat retrograde 
planet as giving the results from the preceding house also.
2 
Then it has been shown how Mars influences the birth of the 
child when the horoscope of the father is seen independently. Such 
an independent examination of the mother's horoscope also yields the 
same results. Now the readers are being taken into the most 
complex area thus: 
(a) The effect of Mars on the 5th house or the 5th lord or the 
ninth house or the 9th lord of both parents. 
(b) The Moon transit effect on the horoscope of the parent which 
indicates the family affinity unmistakably.' 
Abbreviations 
Abbreviations being used in the table are L for Lagna, 5H for 
the 5th house and 5L for the 5th lord. 
1. Mr. KCF. : L (6), SH (10), SL (9). 
Mrs. K CF. : L (9), 5H (1), SL (1). 
2. This principle has been tested during the last eight years, since 1985, on 
thousands of horoscopes. . 
3. It can be tested on millions of horoscopes to show the genetical connection 
between parents and children. 
26 
Mars covered SH and SL in six months and on May 29, 19S9 
when a son was born to them, Mars was aspeeting father's 
Sth house and mother's Lagna. 
The Moon was in the Sth house of ~he mother. 
2. Mr. N.S. : L(6), SH (10), SL (9). 
Mrs. N.S. : L (7), 5H (11), SL (1). 
On August 26, 1968, when a child Was born to them, Mars 
from Cancer aspected the Sth house of both parents. 
The Moon was in the Lagna of the .father. 
3. Mr. K.K. : L (7), 5H (11), SL (8). 
Mrs. K.K. : L (S), 5H (9), 5L (8). 
OnJune 17, 1960 when a child was born to them, Mars from 
Aries aspeeted the Sth lord of both parents. 
The Moon aspected mother's Lagna and passed through 
father's Sth house only a few hours before the birth of the 
child. 
4. Dr. R.K. C. : L (2), 5H (6), 5L (5). 
Mars, on December 28, 1963, was in Sagittarius having 
. covered within six months the 5L and SH of both parents. 
The Moon was in Taurus, Lagna of both parents. 
S. Col. HN.S. : L (9), 5H (1), 5L (12). 
Mrs. HN. : L (8), 5H (12), 5L (6). 
On August 26, 1960, when their famous daughter Shiraj 
Shaheed was born, Mars covered 5L and 5H of both parents 
within the last three months. At the time of the birth of the 
child Mars was' aspeeting the Lagna of both parents. 
The Moon was on mother's 5L aspecting father's SL. 
6. Mr. M., lA.S. : L (4), 5H (8), 5L (5). 
Mrs. M., l.A.S. : L (3), 5H (7), 5L (11). 
On December 14, 1974, when a child was born to them, 
Mars was in the 5th house of the father aspeeting the 5L of 
the mother. 
The Moon was on SH of the father aspeeting the Lagna of 
the mother. 
27 
7. Mr. M.G.] : L (7), 5H (11), 5L (10). 
Mrs. M.G.] : L (5), 5H (9), 5L (11). 
On September 6, 1964, when a child was born to them, Mars 
from Cancer was aspecting 5L of both parents and the 5th 
house of the father and the 5th house of the mother and was 
also on the father's Moon. 
8. Mr. K v.R, : L (12), 5H (4), 5L (2). 
Mrs. K V.R. : L (12), 5H (4), 5L (2). 
On September 9, 1972 when a child was born to them, Mars 
was in Leo but till August 4, 1972 was in the 5th house of 
both parents. 
The Moon was in Virgo aspecting Lagna of both parents. 
9. Mr. KS.R : L (3), 5H (7), 5L (3). 
Mrs. KS.R : L (9), 5H (1), 5L (4). 
On March 22, 1975 when a son was born to them, Mars was 
in Capricorn aspecting the 5L and 5H of mother and till 
February 22, 1975, Mars had also aspected the 5L of the 
father. 
The Moon was in Gemini, the Lagna of the father, and 
aspecting the Lagna of the mother. 
10. Mr. Anand: L (3), 5H (7), 5L (10). 
Mrs. Anand: L (9), 5H (1), 5L (10). 
On October 13, 1969 when a child was born to them, Mars 
was in Capricorn on 5L of the father and aspecting the 5L 
and 5H of the mother. . 
The Moon was in Gemini in father's Lagna and also 
aspecting mother's Lagna. 
11. Mr. v., LA.S. : L (2), 5H (6), 5L (7). 
Mrs. v.; LA.S. : L (7), 5H (11), 5L (1). 
On April 29, 1964 when a child was born to them, Mars 
moving between Pisces and Aries alternatively was on 
mother's 5L aspecting the 5L of the father. 
The Moon was in Scorpio and had only few hours before 
passed over mother's 5L and was now aspecting father's 
Lagna. 
28 
12. Col. P.M.L. : L (7), 51-1 (11), 5L (11). 
Mrs. P.M.L. : L (11), 5H (3), 5L (1). 
Mars from Cancer after having covered father's 5H and 5L 
was now in mother's 5H at,the time of the birth of the child 
January 12,1961 and the Moon was in Libra in the Lagna 
of the father. 
13, Mr. G.M.P. : L(8), 5H (12), 5L (1). 
Mrs. G.M.P. : L (9), 5H (1), 5L (12). 
On April 11, 1956 when a child was born to them, Mars was 
in Sagittarius aspeeting father's 5H and was in mother's 
Lagna. 
The Moon was in father's 5H and on mother's 5L. 
14. Mr. Y.N.G, : L (5), 5H (9), 5L (4). 
Mrs, Y.N.G .. : L (4), 5H (8), 5L (7). 
On December 12, 1953 Mars from Libra was on mother's 
5L after aspeeting father's 5H, 
The Moon from Aquarius aspeeted fath~r's Lagna. 
CHAPTER FOUR 
Birth of Children through 
Transit of Planets - III 
In arriving at the results from the same data those cases have been 
omitted where the date of birth of the child was not noted in my 
records. The tabulated summary of the results is : 
Mars 
Aspects Had aspected 
at birth before birth 
but within 
9 months 
1 2 3 
(a) Males 8 cases 4 cases 
(b) Females 5 cases 6 cases 
(c) Couples 
- Father 13 cases 1 case 
-Mother 13 cases 1 case 
Other uses of this research 
Moon 
Aspects Had passed 
at birth 
4 5 
not studied not studied 
not studied not studied 
13 cases 1 case 
13 cases 1 case 
I have discussed as far as possible the basis of timing such an 
important event in the life of an individual as the birth of a child. 
But I have particularly confined myself to the birth of the first 
child, though it has not been my area of specialisation or 
prediction. I have done this research fairly well mainly because 
I have come across horoscopes of grown-up men and women 
whose birthday, month and year are known but the time is not. 
Instead of fixing up the Lagna of the father or mother on the basis 
of a Prashna (horary horoscope), I have found it very satisfactory 
to do it on the basis of planetary transits of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars 
30 
and the Moon in the horoscope of the first child, and, inferen­
tially, fix the rising sign of the father or mother. After doing this, 
I have verified past events and corrected the degree of the Lagna 
itself on the basis of an individual horoscope and given 
predictions which have come out true. 
In this context, the continuing controversy about the Lagna of 
Mrs. Indira Gandhi has to be kept in mind. This research of mine 
very clearly establishes that the Moon of both her sons, Rajiv and 
Sanjay, in Leo on Mrs. Gandhi's Mars who is her Putrakaraka' 
planet, very clealy establishes her Lagna as Cancer. Jupiter and 
Saturn were shown in the last article to be decisive in the matter. 
While my late mother, who specialised in this, could pinpoint 
months in advance the date of birth of the child. I have made use 
of it . occasionally in the case of my friends · when they were 
expecting their wives to deliver and I have successfully pinpointed 
the last 48 hours preceding the birth of the child. 
Sex of the child 
This research can further be made use of to point out the sex <;>f 
the child to be born. This, of course, will depend upon the 
promise in the horoscopes of the father and the mother. If a male 
child is promised in the birth horoscope only then can a male be 
born. But if both male and female are promised, it will become 
very easy to predict the sex of the next child after examining also 
the horoscope of the first child. 
This is a long and interesting exercise and an astrologer in D.P. 
has never failed in predicting the sex of the child to be born 
correctly, months in advance like my late mother. But, this 
astrologer, it seems, fails in all other areas of his predictions. The 
point being stressed is that many of the traditional secrets of our 
great Maharshis have been preserved by these Brahmins through 
some oral traditions and they do not want to part with them. It 
is their source of living and if they teach it to others, they fear 
that they would be deprived of their livelihood. But if they parted 
with these formulae, astrological sciences could have gone by now 
far beyond all the sciences of the world put together. We still have 
1. Child-giving ' 
31 
to struggle with these formulae and have to collect them almost 
by chance from the houses of these pundits.' 
In my case, I was lucky that an old astrologer on his pilgrimage 
had come to me to help him cast a horoscope and, in return, like 
a true Satwik Brahmin, he thought, he should give to me 
something as a parting gift. He repeatedly told me, "Nothing in 
the world can happen unless Saturn andJupiter plan it out. You cannot 
even produce a child without their blessings". 
But let me once again make it clear that my mother, who 
outlined the whole theory for me because she herself learnt it from 
an old Andhra Brahmin, told me to work out more details after 
casting the horoscope correctly and, give predictions not merely 
on the transit of these planets, but, also on the basis of Saptamsha 
and, antardasha, pratyantar dasha and where-ever necessary work 
even on the sookshma dasha. Whenever confusion arose, base 
your prediction on the female horoscope onIy;3 after alI, she, as 
a mother, has to deliver the baby, said my mother. 
I have found this method exceedingly scientific, amazingly 
accurate and I have beaten gynecologists in predicting at least 
some months and weeks in advance about the date or the day 
preceding or following the birth of the child. 
2. We have not achieved any success in this area in twenty years, since 1973. 
3. 'Maternity is a matter of fact while paternity is a matter of belief' is an old 
saying. 

SECTION TWO : Vimshottari Dasha and Childbirth 
CHAPTER FIVE 
Timing the Birth of Children 
through Vimshottari Dasha 
\i41R'1~I"I~;j X1larr« ~'NWlI'1"1O'If.',;;~,\ I 
"W'fui "W<1i <A T1f'1" ~ q M, '\ I I 
Jyotisham-ayanam Sakhshad Yattat -gnanam-antindriyam 
Praneetam Bhavata Yena Puman Veda Paravaram ... 
SHRIMAD BHAGVATAM, X-slmnda VIU-adhyaya. 
That which is beyond the reach of the five senses and is concealed 
in the womb of the past and the future, can also be known 
through jyotisha-sha stra (astrology). You are the creator of that 
jyotisha-shastra .. 
(Request made by Nanda Baha to Rishi Garga to choose proper 
names for children, Balaram and Krishna). 
Many astrologers may be aware of the fact that the most popular 
Vimshottari dasha we' use generally is only approximate, not 
accurate. There are many reasons for this. Three chief reasons for 
this limitation within which astrologers have to work should be 
understood. 
Birth Time 
Except in highly astrology-conscious families, the noting of the 
birth time of a child has never been accurate. It is because of 
ignorance or indifference to the strict astrolqgical requirement of 
noting down the birth time correctly. Birth time noting in 
Germany has been found to be more dependable, so far, by me, 
than anywhere else. Some friends from USA told me that inspite 
of the best technological advances, either there is indifference or 
34 
carelessness there because of which a difference of five to ten 
minutes in the recorded birth-time should be taken as normal. 
I cannot express any opinion on it. 
As to India, our problems have been, generally most of the 
births being in villages, till recently, even watches were not avail­
able to note down the birth time. This statement is not an exag­
geration, as we know from our experience, horoscopes and their 
degrees are required to be corrected, which is never an easy job. 
The births even in the cities in the hospitals are based on the 
hearsay statement of a nurse or a lady doctor who is always more 
conscious, rightly and morally, of her duty to save the life first 
of the mother and the child at the time of the delivery of a baby, 
than of the exact birth time. 
It brings us to the ticklish question - what is the correct birth­
time? One need not go into this controversy. The best and the 
most practical way out of it is to verilY the past events of a 
consultor, without asking him or her any question. If some of 
these come out correct, the astrological calculation done can be 
depended on for safe predictions. 
The procedure to be adopted should be: the consultor should 
give only two or three facts about his background. The astrologer 
himself should then proceed to trace out some events of the past 
leading upto his present .problem without the consultor helping 
him. If an astrologer cannot do it, he has obviously not learnt astrology 
properly. If the astrologer can trace out such events competently, but 
the horoscope before him, is not revealing the past events correctly, then 
obviously the events 'ii the past are not reflected in the horoscope before 
him. In my book, Successfol Predictive Techniques 'iiVedicAstrology, 1 
the second section deals with risky predictions, where such 
exercise has been done and explained astrologically, particularly 
in the case of Saryu Kalelkar a singer, in which the birth time 
was not known. A better example is that of Merimee, the wife 
of a French ambassador to India. 
The Ayanamsha 
Those who are doing mrayana astrology, are aware of the 
1. Published in U.S.A. by Passage Press, Salt Lake City, Utah. 
Also see my book Astrology, Destiny and the Wheel of Time. 
35 
difference between the tropical and sidereal zodiac, known as the 
ayanamsha. The anyamsha 6xed by the Calendar Reforms 
Committee of the Government of India, based on the Chitra 
Paksha Ayanamsha, which is used by a majority of astrologers in 
India, has given to us better results. 
But the problem becomes very ticklish if it is seen that in India 
where we have as many as six hundred panchangas or astrological 
almanacs, each panchanga-maker uses his' own ayanamsha for 
reasons both of the sale of his panchanga and also because he 
insists that the local sun-rise and moon-rise become important 
for the calculation of tithis for important Hindu festivals. 
In the absence of a standardised ayanamsha, even if the birth 
time of a native is correct, the horoscope cast can still have a 
different degree of the Moon which will make a substantial 
difference to the balance of the Vimshottari dasha at birth. 
To start with a wrong balance of Vimshottari dasha and to 
expect to arrive at the right antardasha and pratyantar dasha for 
the happening of an event is a vain attempt. It is for this reason 
that every astrologer must become aware of the fact that he is working 
on approximate Vimshottari dasha balance. 
How to overcome this problem? My approach has been three fold: 
(a) Write down whatever strikes you as possible in the case of 
a native whose horoscope is before you and ask him or her 
to tick it.' 
(b) If majority of the events traced out are correct, then assume 
that the birth horoscope may be correct but the degrees of 
the Lagna and the Moon may still be needing some 
correction. To discover it, trace out the present problem of 
the consultor without his or her having to tell you about it. 
If this is correct, with a margin of error of three to six 
months, give some predictions about future. 
(c) The predictions about the future should be given on the basis 
of the, what may be, approximate Vimshottari dasha balance. 
It is at this stage that the transit of planets should be made use 
of, and, combined with the maha, antar and pratyantar dasha of 
the Vimshottari dasha. 
2. See examples in Astrology, Destiny and the Wheel of Time by K.N. Rao. 
36 
Note : Section One which was based only on the transit of 
planets has been hundred percent replicable. But its limitation is 
that it occurs many times in one's life. 
When do such transits indicate .and promise birth of children 
is revealed by the Vimshottari d~ha, in the years following 
marriage in the case of orthodox societies, or of puberty where 
children born out of wedlock, are not unacceptable to a society. 
When I published that research I was so busy with my office 
work that I could not show the use of the Vimshottari dasha along 
with it, and had hoped, that some astrologers would do it. But 
that not having happened, I am completing an incomplete task, 
in this and subsequent sections of this book. 
The unreliable birth time and the ticklish problem of the 
ayanamsha has led to the total negligence of the use of divisional 
horoscopes in recent years. Old astrologers, now in their eighties 
were better equipped to interpret at least seven divisional 
horoscopes: the Birth Horoscope, the Hora (one half) the 
Drekkana (one third), the Saptamsha (one seventh), the Navamsha 
(one ninth) the Dwadashamsha (one-twelfth) and the 
Trimshamsha (one thirtieth but actually five divisions only). They 
may have worked on wrong ayanamsha and, therefore, wrong 
divisional horoscopes. But their spiritual level was high, their 
classical knowledge of Vedic Astrology sound, and they had with 
them some traditional secrets which they never taught to people 
outside their families. Some of their predictions in the familiar­
traditional areas have been very good. They kept up a great 
astrological tradition with-out adding much to it through modern 
researches. With their death most of the traditional secrets have 
been lost. 
Astrologers must know something about astrological literature 
available in the market. There is no astrologer in the world who 
knows how to use correctly even one-tenth of the techniques 
given in Brihat Parashara Hora Shastra. Some good translations 
from Sanskrit into regional languages of India, particularly by 
Sitaram Jha, into Hindi are good translations without any illus­
trative example~. Others who have translated, into English or 
other regional languages, this great work, have mangled it. 
There are no book, expect what we of the Indian Council of 
Astrological Sciences of Chapter One, Delhi, have produced showing 
the success of a predictive technique which work, and can be replicated. 
37 
Finally, what must be known by every astrologer is that 
astrology cannot be learnt by merely reading the books available 
in the market. It has to be a process of continuous experimenting 
with the different meaning of a planetary combination in the fast 
changing era of ours. Sharing a replicable astrological research, 
and asking other astrologers to test it, and after finding it accep­
table, carry forward the research. We must recognise that we have 
entered the new era of Vedic astrology, the era of experimentation 
with the various techniques available, which must be learnt, used ' 
and experimented with, without distorting the classical principles 
of Vedic astrology. 
This can be done through series of observations on hundreds 
of horoscopes. 
To advance that line, use of Vimshottari dasha, whose balance 
at birth may be doubtful, must begin somewhere. What I have 
found working in nearly sixty percent or more cases is : child births 
take place in the mahadasha-antardasha 0/ planets connected with: 
(a) The Lagna or the Lagna lord, or, 
(b) The fifth house or the fifth lord or, 
(c) The ninth house or the ninth lord of the birth horoscope. 
Note : Divisional horoscopes are not being discussed in this 
section. Here only the use of the Vimshottari dasha, with a 
balance of dasha, which may be doubtful, and transit of planets, 
forms the basis of this section. 
From here we go to the more technical, third section. For our 
purpose we are taking up : 
(a) Some horoscopes of fathers of children; 
(b) Some horoscopes of mothers of children; and, 
(c) Some horoscopes of the parents (mother and father) of 
children. 
The soundness of our approach, using the doubtful balance of the 
Vimshottari mahadasha with transits, can be tested in this 
section. 
FATHER AND CHILDREN 
Example One 
Timing through Vimshottari dasha, the first son was born in the 
38 
Saturn Ketu (R) 
Examt,:le One 
Jupiter "her A former Romanian 
Ambassador who was 
kidnapped in India 
Nov. 18, 1938 
Birth time not known 
Bucharest 
Mercwy 
Rahu Moon Lagna Ven (R) Mars Sun 
Adopted an approximate balance of 
Moon of 3 years. 
Y M D 
Birth date 1938 11 18 
Moon upto 1941 11 18 
Saturn Rahu Moon (R) 
Son 
Oct. 22, 1967 
1:20 p.m. Jupiter Bucharest Venus 
Sun 
Lagna Mere. (R) 
Mars Ketu 
Saturn Moon 
, 
Lagna Son 
Rahu Aug. 26, 1970 
6 to 6:30 p.m. Sun 
New Delhi Mars 
Ketu 
Jupiter Mercury 
Venus 
6 Moon 
Mars 
YM 
Mars upto 1948 
Rahu upto 1954 
Jup-Mars upto 1968 
Jup-Rah u upto 1970 
10 Lagna 11 
Mars 
9 
Saturn (R) 12 6 
Rahul 
2 
Moon 
3 
11 
2 8 
5 
Sun 
Mars Ketu 
11 
11 
6 
11 
8 
4 
D 
18 
18 
24 
18 
7 Sun 
ere.(R) 
Ketu 
5 
upiter 
enus 
39 
mahadasha ofJupiter, the Lagna lord and the antardasha ofMars, 
the fifth 100;d. 
The second son was born in Jupiter- Rahu. Here Rahu involves 
the 5/11 axis. 
Transits: In the case of the first son, Saturn aspects the fifth lord, 
Mars. Jupiter aspects the fifth house, Aries. Mars in the Lagna 
Mars 
Jupiter Rahu 
Moon 
Example Two Mercury 
Father Sun 
Aug. 11, 1928 
Lagoa 8 03 a.m. Venus 
Saturn 
Ketu 
Sun 
Venus 
Mars 
Mercury 
Daughter" Kern 
Aug. 8, 1960 
Moon Rahu 
Moon 
(Aug. 7) 
Jup.Sat. 
Moon Rahu Jupiter 
Saturn Sun 
Daughter' 
Aug 28, 1965 Venus 
Mercury 
Ketu Mars Mars 
(Aug. 11) 
6 7 Lagna 
Venus 
Saturn 5 
8 2 
11 
2 
3 
1 
4 10 
7 
5 
Rahu 6 
Rahu 
3 2 
Jupiter Moon 
1 
Sun 4 10 
5 7 
Venus Mars 
Mercury 
6 
Mars 
(Au. 11) 
Moon 
1 
12 upiter 
Sun 
Venus 11 12 Mars 
ercury 
K,ttl 
Moon 
9 Moon 
(Aug. 7) 
up.Sat. 
11 
Saturn 
9 
8 
• The Lagna is not known. North Indian chart is based on natural zodiac. 
40 
was in Scorpio only a week before on the ninth lord, the Sun and 
the Moon passing over Aries within seventy two hours aspects the 
ninth lord, the Sun. In the case of the second son, Saturn and 
Jupiter occupy the 5/11 axis. Mars in the ninth house aspects the 
ninth lord also while the Moon in Gemini aspects the Lagna. 
It was a risky prediction. Fixing the Lagna of the kidnapped 
ambassador, a prediction was given that he would come back in 
the last week of November 1991. He was kidnapped on October 
9, 1991 and he returned on November 26, 1991. 
Example Two 
The fmt daughter was born in Rahu-Mercury and none of the 
principles given are covered lord by Mercury who is with the 
Lagna lord. Rahu is with ninth lord. The horoscope is accurate. So 
the Saptamsha can be prepared. 
The second daughter was born in Rahu-Moon. Both are 
associated with the ninth lord, Mars. It falls within our 
formulated rules. 
Transits: Saturn, Jupiter and the Moon were in the fifth house 
of the father and Mars from Aquarius was aspecting the natal 
ninth lord, Mars in Taurus, when the first daughter was born. 
At the time of the birth of the second daughter Jupiter was 
aspecting the fifth hou,se, Saturn the ninth house, Mars till 
August 11,1965 had aspected the fifth house and the Moon was 
in the ninth house. 
Example Three 
Rahu-Ketu occupy 5/11 axis. Saturn is in the Lagna. The son was 
born in Rahu-Saturn. 
Rahu Mars 
Example Three Lagna 
Saturn 
Father 
Sept. 14/15, 1947 Sun 
Moon 
Ketu Jupiter Venus 
Mercury 
Sun 
6 Venu %on 
Mere 
Jupiter 
Lagna 
Saturn 
Mars 
. Moon Moon 
. (Aug.1S) Ketu Jupiter 
Saturn 
Son· Sun 
Aug. 16, 1976 Venus 
Mercury 
11l.!.arf41 
Rahu Mars 
Ketu 
Sun 
Venus 
Mercury Jupit er 
Mats 
Daught er' 
March 26,1978 
Saturn 
Moon 
Moon (March 14) 
Rahu 
Moon 
Ketu 
1 
10 
Saturn 
Sun 4 
7 5 
Venus 
M", 
(Aug. 14) 
Mer. 6 
Mars 
3 2 
Jupiter 
Rahu 
Mercury 
1 
Mars 4 10 
7 5 
Moon 
41 
8 
• The Lagna is not known. North Indian chart is based on natural zodiac. 
The daughter was born in Rahu-Mercury. Here Mercury aspects the ninth house. 
Transits 
Jupiter, Mars and the Moon get connected with the fifth and the ninth houses. But what about Saturn? Find out when Saturn retrograded and a clear answer will be available. 
During the birth of the second child Jupiter was on the fifth lord, Mars, Saturn was aspecting the ninth lord Jupiter, Mars too was aspecting the ninth lord and, the Moon had aspected the ninth house within seventy two hours. 
Example Four 
A daughter was born to him in the Moon-Jupiter period. They do not fall under the rules fOCfnulated. It is an accurate horoscope. So the Saptamsha shoUld the prepared. 
42 
Rahu Lagna 
Jupiter Example Four 
Father 
October 8, 1950 
Mars 
Daughter· 
Oct. 17, 1980 
Moon 
Moon Sun Mere. 
day before Mars Mars 
(Oct. 3) 
Moon 
Saturn 
Mere,Ven. 
Ketu Sun 
Venus 
Sanirn 
Jupiter 
Sat. 6 
2 
MoonS 11 
8 
Mer. Ve Mars 
KeN 7 Sun 
12 
Rahu 
Jupiter 
10 
9 
9 
Moon 
(, day 
8 . fore) 
* The Lagna is not known: North Indian chart is based on natural zodiac. 
Transits 
Sarurn and Jupiter were in the fifth house of the father. Mars had 
aspected the ninth house till October 3, 1980 and the Moon had 
moved into the ninth house, Capricorn. 
Example Five 
The first daughter was born in the Jupiter-Jupiter period. Jupiter 
aspects the fifth house. 
The second daughter was born in Jupiter-Mercury period. 
Mercury is with the fifth lord, Mars. . 
Transits 
In the case of the first daughter Jupiter aspects the fifth house 
while Sarurn and Mars aspect the fifth lord. The Moon aspeeted 
the Lagna two days before. 
Moon 
Rahu 
Example Five 
Father 
Dec. 8, 1946 . 
Mercury Jupiter Lagna Ketu Venus Sun Mars 
Daughter* 
Jan. 5, 1980 
Daughter* 
June 15, 1984 
Jupiter Saturn 
. Mars . -
Saturn 
(R) 
Moon 
Oan. 3) 3 
Moon 
Jupiter 
Mars 
Saturn 
Moon 
12 6 
3 
1 
4 10 
7 
Saturn 
Mars 
43 
12 
11 
9 
8 
9 
Jupiter 
8 
• Ligna is not known. North Indian chart is based on natural ~odiac. 
In the case of the second daughter Saturn Jupiter and Mars aspect the fifth house while the Moon is in the ninth house. 
Now see five similar cases of mothers. 
44 
MOTHER AND CHILDREN 
In the development of · the astrological : concept of planetazy 
linkage between the parents and children it is the mother's 
horoscope which is more relevant for the obvious reason: 
maternity is a matter of fact; paternity is a matter of belief 
Standard Approach 
The standard approach in all these cases of women is to note the 
date of her marriage, note the years available to her for having 
children, which will be, for our purposes between the ages of 
fifteen and forty-five, generally. Wherever exceptions occur, they 
will be seen to fall within the standardised parameters. Now note 
down the following : 
(a) Planets owning the fifth house, or positioned there or 
aspecting the fifth house from the Lagna, or associated with 
the fifth lord. 
(b) Similarly do the same as above but from the Moon Lagna 
(optional). 
(c) Again do the same as in (a) but from Jupiter (optional). 
Children are born in the periods of these planets. Extend the 
same rules to the ninth house and the ninth lord. 
Transits 
All the rules of transits of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars and the Moon 
will have to be applied as shown already. 
Note 
1. Here the problem of childlessness is not being discussed. . . 
2. Another aspect, miscarriages and aborrions will be discussed 
later, in another book. 
3. The birth of abnormal children will be taken up later. 
4. Mishaps to children will also be taken up later. 
Here, in this section, what is being discussed is the normal birth of the 
normal children by normal mothers. 
Optional rules are not being applied. 
45 
Example One 
First apply the dasha as the transits of planets repeat many times and every time such planets come to the crucial birth producing areas, children are not born, unless such a promise is given by the dasha-periods. ' 
This woman was running the period of Venus when she got 
Sun Mars 
Saturn Moon , Jupiter 
Ketu Example One 
Mercury Mother 
March 18, 1942 
Venus Bal of Mercul)' 
7y 3m 16d 
Lagoa 
Jupiter 
Saturn Daughter Moon Nov, 13, 1964 
Mother 's dasha 
Venus-Rahu 
KeN Mercury Sun (R) 
Rahu 
Saturn Daughter 
(R) Nov, IS, 1966 
Mother's dasha 
, Venus-Rahu 
Venus-Jup, 
Lagoa Venus Sun 
Moon Mercury KeN 
Rahu 
Rahu 
Mars 
Lagna 
Venus 
Jupiter 
Mars 
11 10 
Saturn 
(R) 
Lagna 
7 
10 4 
1 
Lagna 
Moon 
Jupiter 
Venus 
46 
married in 1961. The antardasha was that of the Moon not 
associated with any of the child producing combinations given 
above. It was followed by that of Mars antardasha well associated 
with the fifth lord, but transit of planets were favourable. 
The First Child 
Then came the sub-period of Rahu, Saturn had moved into the 
fifth house of this woman: Jupiter was in Taurus on August 4, 
1964 on the fifth lord and continued there till October 25. The 
Jupiter retrograded in Aries but Jupiterean approval for the birth 
of the child having been given, the birth of a child was assured. 
Venus Saturn Sun 
, Rahu MerCUl)' 
Son 
May 26,1969 
Mother)s dasha 
Venus-Jupiter 
Venlls-Saturn 
Lagna Moon 
Jupiter Mm (R) Ketu 
Moon Saturn 'Lagna (R) 
Saturn 
3 1 12 
4 Lagna Moon 
Rahu Daughter 
Jan. 4, 1971 2 
Ketu 5 11 Rahu 
Mother's dasha 
Venus-Saturn Ketu 8 
6 Jupiter 10 
Sun Jupiter Mars Mercury Venus 
7 Venus 9 
Mars Sun 
Mereu 
Mother's Dasha Antardasha Remarks 
1st child Venus Rahu Venus Lagna lord. Rabu 5/11 axis 
2nd child Venus RahulJupiter Jupiter with the fifth lord, 
3rd child Venus JUpiter/Saturn Jupiter <as above}-8aturn 5th lord 
4th child Venus Saturn Fifth lord 
47 
Mars and the Moon were in the fifth house of the mother when 
the child was born. 
This is thus a case of a perfect planetary connection. 
The Second Child 
The dasha-connection has been explained in the table. Saturn is 
in the fifth house of the mother. Jupiter was in Gemini till August 
15, 1966, two months before the birth of the child. 
Mars from, Leo aspected the fifth house. 
The Moon aspected the ninth house from Sagittarius. 
The Third Child 
The dasha-connection has been explained in the table. In transit, 
Saturn was in the seventh house of the mother, aspecting the 
ninth house of the mother; Jupiter was in Leo till October 11, 
1968, eight months before the birth of the child, falling within 
our nine-month rule. Mars aspected the fifth house and the 
Moon did it till the morning of May 26, the day of the birth. 
The Fourth Child 
The dasha-connection is clear. Saturn aspects the ninth house in 
transit: Jupiter was in Libra till December 11, 1970. Till January 
2, 1971 Mars was in Scorpio aspecting the 5th house, 5th lord 
and the ninth house, fulfilling the seventy five day rule. On 
January 2, 1971 the Moon was in Aquarius. 
There is hundred percent replication of six points. 
Example Two 
Dashas are explained in the table. To understand the transits see 
the stars marked in the horoscopes and see aspects of Saturn, 
Jupiter, Mars and the Moon.The replication is hundred percent. 
. Jupiter 
* (R) 
RaIlu Example Two 
Mother 
Aug. 6, 1951 
* Bal. of Sun 
Sy9m 21d 
Mars 
Sun 
Ketu 
Mercul"] 
Venus 
Moon* 
Lagna 
~aturn * 
Ketu Mere. * 'len. Moo 
5 
4 Sun 
Mars 
2 * 1 
48 
Moon 
* 
Son" 
Jupiter Dec. 24, 1985 
* 
Saturn Mars 
Jupiter Jupiter 
* (June 16) 
Son· 
Moon July 13, 1987 
* 
Saturn 
Mars 
* 
Son· 
* 
Sept. 27, 1990 
Sat (R) 
Q'une 18) 
Saturn Moon 
Moon (Sept. 26) 
Mother's Dasha 
1st child Rahu 
2nd child Rahu 
3rd child Rahu 
* 
* 
Mars 
* 
* 
Jupiter 
* 
* 
Antardasha 
Venus 
Venus 
Moon 
* 
Moon * 
2 
3 
Jupit er 4 
* 5 6 
* 
Remarh 
12 
12 
11 
1 * 10 Saturn (R) 
7 Gun, 18) 
Aspect ed by Venus (9th lord) 
Aspected by Venus (9th lord) 
Moon with 9th lord 
• The Lagna is not known. North Indian chart is based on . natural zodiac. 
49 
Example Three : In the case of the second daughter (Oct. 22) 
the special rule of retrogression becomes applicable. 
* Ketu Mars 
* 
Jupiter Moon 4 
* 
Mercury Example Three 
Mother 
Jan. 29, 1955 
Sun Mercury ending Lagna 
on Nov. 2, 1961 
Rahu Venus Saturn 
* 
Daughter' 
Oct. 29, 1984 
* JMiter Saturn 
Mc
ars 
oon 
* * 
Moon Moon 
* Oct. 20) 
Jupiter Daughter' 
Oct. 22, 1986 
Saturn (R) will 
Mars' give effect f~om 
Libra also 
Mars * Saturn 
(Sop<. 26) (R) 
(A"g. 12) 
Mothtr's Darha Antardasha 
1st child' Venus Saturn 
. 
2nd child Venus Mercury 
Remarks 
Moon 
2 
* 3 
5 
2 
11 
* upiter 
9 Man 
8 oon 
* * 12 11 
Moon Jupiter 
(Oct. 20 ) 
1 
4 10 Mars 
7 
9 
Mars * 8 SepI.26) 
atum (R) 
(Au 12) 
Saturn aspects the fifth house 
Mercury is a'pected by the fifth lord Jupite 
>II The Lagna is not known. North Indian chart is based on natural zodiac. 
50 
Example Four 
* * 
Mercury 
Mars Venus 
Sun 
Ketu Example Four 
Mother 
May 8, 1960 
Bal. of Moon * 
2y5m4d Rahu 
Lagna 
Sat (R) Moon 
JuP (R) 
* * Jupit"" Jupiter Mars (June 18) 
Son* 
Nov. 4, 1988 
* Moon 
Saturn 
* * Mars 
Daughter· 
Jupiter 
July 24, 1990 
* Moon 
Sat (R) 
Mother's Dasha Antardasha 
1st child Jupiter Jupiter 
2nd child Jupiter Saturn 
11 
Ketu 
10 
Jupi ter 
2 
3 
Jupiter 
6 
RemarkJ 
Lagna 
Saturn (R) 
Jupiter (R) 
9 
* Jupiter 
(June 18) 
1 
* Mars 
12 
11 
9 Saturn 
9 
8 Sat (R) 
Aspects the houses 5th and 9th. 
Special rule of retrogression. 
.. The Lagna is not known. North Indian chart is based on natural zodiac . . 
Example Five 
Mer (R) 
Lagna Sun 
Ketu 
Venus 
Mars Example Five 
* 
Mother * May 28,1956 
Bal. of Venus Jupiter 
11y11m 17d 
Moon Saturn 
* 
Rahu 
* 
* 
Daughter" 
* June 24, 1982 Moon 
Mars (R) gives 
effect from Mars 
Leo also (Dec.2;81) 
Saturn 
* * 
Jupiter Mars (R) 
till 
Mayl1,~2 
Moon 
(Lagna of Moon Mars 
mother) 
* * 
* 
Son" 
August 2, 1983 
* Sat (R) 
Jupiter July2,'S3 
* 
5 
Mars 
Dec.2, 
SI 
5 
Moon 
Lagna 
12 
3 9 
6 
Jupiter 
Sat Mars(R) 
till Ma 11 '82 
* 
Moon 
(Lagna of 
mother) 
1 
4 10 
7 
Saturn (R) 
July2,'S3 
51 
Mars 
* 11 
10 
Moon 
* 
7 
12 
11* 
9 * 8 
* 
12 * 11 
Mother's Dasho . ,Antardasha Remarks 
1st child MoonSth L Venus 
2nd child Moon Sun 
Venus is ~speeted by the 5th lord 
Moon 
Sun aspeeted by 9th lord and 
aspects 9th house 
• The Lama is not known. North Indian chart is based on natural zodiac. 

SEmON THREE : Childbirth - Some Complex Areas 
CHAPTER SIX 
Entering the Complex Area: 
Theoretical 
So far we have made use of horoscopes without mentioning the 
degrees of the Lagna and other planets and have made use of an 
approximate balance of the Vimshottari mahadasha. This was 
done to show how easily a workable method of predicting the 
birth of children can be evolved for astrological purposes. 
It is a .quick, sound and fast method of predicting the time of 
the birth of children and can be replicated with over ninety 
percent accuracy. The week of birth of the child can be predicted 
with some margin of error. 
The problem is removing uncertainties created by obstacles to 
child birth, the birth of abnormal children and the final problem 
of childlessness. Then there are tragedies which affect parents. 
Astrologers can predict all these, astrologers alone among scientists, 
and saints with clairvoyant visions, can predict such events. 
The spiritually gifted saint needs no horoscope to do it. An 
astrologer needs a hundred percent correct horoscope to do it. 
The astrologer should be sound enough technically to interpret 
the horoscope after veritying its correctness, with the Vimshottari 
dasha balance and, for the purpose of this paper, the correct 
Saptamsha, or the one-seventh division of a horoscope. 
Data Needed 
To get correct data the following are the minimum requirements: 
(al Correct birth time which has been tested for predictions 
about some other events. 
(b) Correctly cast horoscope, according to the Chitra Paksha 
Ayanamsha, which has given us very good results. 
54 
(c) Then use a correct Saptamsha. What then is meant i:>y a correct Saptamsha? In the case of the Saptamsha, a rashi of 30 degrees is divided by 7, giving to each part 4 degrees, 
17 minutes and 8 seconds with some decimal points still. 
This inevitably means that a planet or a Lagna bordering 
on 4°17'8" and its multiples can become tricky for predic­
tions. 
The Saptamsha chart can be prepared by using the table given below. But remember there can be errors if a planet is 4°17' or 
8°34' etc. It has been observed that the real problem is ,vith the Lagna, the Moon and Mercury in the Saptamsha. If these are all right, generally the Saptamsha being used will be dependable. 
Saptarnsha (one-seventh division) 
!'l " 
~ ~ ~ 
'il :u 0 .~ 0 
" " 
~ 
u .~ " j 
.~ ~ e .~ '1: 
~ 
~ 
~ u 
" " § 0 'bh f;l< " u 
~ " 
. .0 cr' ~ 
0 0 U o-l :;: ;:l u 
'" u <: ~ en en 
4°17' 1 8 3 10 5 12 7 2 9 4 11 6 
8°34' 2 9 4 11 6 1 8 3 10 5 12 7 
12°51' 3 10 5 12 7 2 9 4 11 6 1 8 
17°08' 4 11 6 1 8 3 10 5 12 7 2 9 
21°25' 5 12 7 2 9 4 11 6 1 8 3 10 
25°42' 6 1 8 3 10 5 12 7 2 9 4 11 
30°00' 7 2 9 4 11 6 1 8 3 10 5 12 
This chapter deals with the theory which has been tested on hundreds 
of horoscopes, and which, it will be shown in subsequent chapters, 
should be applied only when the astrological data being used is not 
doubtful. 
How the rules given here are to be used in subsequent chapters is being shown through. a model example of the horoscopes of a couple, husband and wife. . 
55 
The data should be the following : 
(a) The birth horoscope with correct degrees of planets and the 
Lagna according to the Chitra Paksha Ayanamsha (Lahiri). 
(b) The Navamsha horoscope invariably, or the ninth di·.iision. 
(c) The Saptamsha horoscope invariably, or the seventh division 
of a horoscope, as given in the table here. 
(d) The Vimshottari mahadasha with antardashas. 
(e) The transit of planets; 
This five-step approach will be the standardised approach that 
will be applied throughout in this book. There are various time~ 
tested thumb-rules which are not being used here, as this book 
aims at introducing the scientific methodology, which can be 
used foreig!Jty percent or more correct predictions, without 
m~king it cumbersome. 
It has to be repeated again and again that if the horoscope is 
incorrect, the method given in the earlier section can still be used 
profitably. If the data is accurate finer analysis of problems 
relating to children can be done through the methodology being 
given here. 
Lagna 
Mercwy 
Jupiter 
(R) 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Sun Venus Rahu 
Husband 
April 18, 1948 
28'02' 
4'44' 
20'22' 
Ketu 
. 
-Sa,turn 
Moon 
Mars 
4 
SalUr 
Moon 5 
Mar 
Mars 21'05' 
Mercury 22' 47' 
Jupiter (R) 5'48' 
Lagna 
Mercury 
12 
11 
10 
3 9 Jupiter 
(R) 
6 
Venus 
Saturn 
Rahu 
8 
7 
Ketu 
2'21' 
22'38' 
20' 36' 
56 
Now work out the dasha balance and give the full antardashas: 
Date of Birth 
Bal. of Mercury 
Ketu upto 
Y M D 
1948 4 18 
12 3 12 
1960 ' 7 30 
1967 7 30 
Venus : antardashas 
Venus 1970 11 30 
Sun 1971 11 30 
Moon 1973 7 30 
Mars 1974 9 30 
Rabu 1977 9 30 
Jupiter 1980 5 30 
Saturn 1983 7 30 
MereuI)' 1986 5 30 
Ketu 1987 7 30 
The antardashas of Venus have been taken because this person got married in December 1976, after which his chances of becoming a father in a normal way, if his wife's horoscope is not of the obstructing variety, will become a reality, 
Now mark out the fifth house and the fifth lords from: 
(a) The Lagna 
(b) The Moon 
(c) Jupiter 
This is made use of to count the number of children one can have, The results are not accurate always, Tabulate them in this way: 
From The lord 
of the 
fifth house 
The Lagna Moon 
The Moon Mars 
Jupiter Mars 
Planets 
in the 
fifth house 
Moon 
Saturn, Mars 
Sun 
Rahu 
Planets Planets asso-
aspeeting the elated with 
fifth house the fifth lord 
Saturn 
Mars 
Venus Saturn 
Moon 
Moon 
Saturn 
57 
So the child-giving planets are the Moon, Mars, Rahu, Saturn 
and Venus. 
The marriage of this person took place in the period of Venus­
Rahu, both of which are qualified to give him children. 
Note : It has been the observation of many astrologers that Venus 
and Rahu are capable of giving marriage and children 
most generously, compared to other planets, unless they 
are very heavily afflicted. 
Now note sequence of the dasha : V enus-Rahu, Venus-Jupiter, 
Venus-Saturn, Venus-Mercury and Venus-Ketu. 
Rules of Elimination 
Now do a limited exercise by finding out the planets influencing 
the fifth house, from the Navamsha and Saptamsha Lagnas. The 
Navamsha and the Saptamsha are given below: 
Lagn. Ketu Jupiter 
Mars Sun 
Venus 
Navamsha 
Moon 
Saturn 
Mercury 
Rahu 
Lagna Sun Saturn Venus Moon 
Mercury 
Ketu Mars 
Saptamsha 
Jupiter Rahu 
. 
. 
58 
In order of priority tabulate the fifth lords of the different 
horoscopes thus : 
(a) From the birth horoscope, the Moon, Mars and Saturn. 
(b) From the Saptamsha horoscope, Moon, Mars, Jupiter and 
the Sun. 
(c) From the Navamsha Lagna the Moon, Venus, Saturn, and 
Mercury 
Now the most important rule is that the mahadasha lord of the fifth 
house from the Lagna and Saptamsha and planets in the fifth houses 
promise a continuous or continual birth of children. 
The antardasha lords which come intermittently hold a similar 
promise. 
All these dasha-promises must be supported by the transits of 
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars and the Moon, as discussed already. 
Now take up the horoscope of the wife and do the same 
exercise. It can be done by a simultaneous look at all the three 
horoscopes and the dasha-periods. \: 
Antardashas in Rahu (ending dates) 
Rahu-Rahu 23 Jan. 1968 
Rahu-Jupiter 17 Jun. 1970 
Rahu-Saturn 23 Apr. 1973 
Rahu-Mercury 11 Nov. 1975 
Rahu-Ketu 29 Nov. 1976 
Rahu-Venus 29 Nov.1979 
Rahu-Sun 23 Oct. 1980 
Rahu-Moon 23 Apr. 1982 
Rahu-Mars 11 Nov. 1983 
Now note, in the birth horoscope, Mars is the fifth lord and 
Sun and Mercury there are aspected by the Moon and Jupiter. 
In the Saptamsha Venus is the fifth lord and the Sun in the 
fifth house is aspected by Jupiter. 
Her marriage took place in December 1976 when she was 
passing through the period of Rahu-Venus, both of which are 
good for child birth as already seen; it will be followed by the 
antardasha of the Sun which again promises the birth of the 
child. 
Mars 
Rahu 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Sun 
Lagna 
Mars 
Ketu 
Rahu 
Moon 
Saturn 
Venus 
Jupiter 
Moon 
Wife 
Dec. 9, 1954 
Bal. of Moon 
3ySm2d 
Mercury Saturn 
Sun Venus 
23"20'19" 
23"50' 
18"47' 
Venus 
Saturn 
Navamsha 
Mercury 
Mars 
Saptamsha 
Sun 
Ketu 
Lal;na 
JuS'ter 
R) 
Mars 
Mercury 
Jupiter (R) 
Moon 
Rahu 
Jupiter 
Lagna 
Mercury 
Ketu 
10"35' 
15"08' 
5"52' 
5 
6 
Saturn 
Rahu 
Sun 
Lagna 
Jupiter 
4 
7 1 
10 
Venus 
Saturn 
Rahu 
Lagna 
Mars Ketu 
10 
~:~~ 1 7 
4 
23 Rahu 
59 
Ketu 
3 
2Moon 
12 
11 
21"43' 
22"53' 
13"22' 
6 
5 
Moon Jupiter 
5 4 Lagna 2 
Mercury, 1 Mars 
3 Rahu 
Ketu 6 12 Moon 
Saturn 
9 Venus 
Sun 7 8 
60 
Now examine transits: 
In 1977, Saturn would be entering her fifth house; Jupiter 
would be in her third house, Taurus, aspecting her ninth house. 
On the basis of these two it is seen that both the dasha and 
the transit of Saturn and Jupiter will favour the birth of children. 
In 1979, Saturn would be in Leo, in her sixth house but after 
retrograding, will give results from Cancer, her fifth house also. 
Jupiter would be in Cancer, her fifth house. 
So it could be predicted that both in Rahu-Venus and Rahu­
Sun she would have children. 
Her children were born on December 25, 1977 and Novem­
ber 3,1979 both of which fall in the child-giving period of Venus 
and the Sun. 
The future transits of Saturn and Jupiter as already seen were 
going to be helpful. How effectively these transits can be made 
use of, in more subtle ways, will be shown later. 
From the discussion of the husband's and wife's birth 
horoscope, the Navamsha and the Saptamsha and the dasha­
periods combined with transits of Saturn and Jupiter what 
emerged out was the astrological fact that immediately after 
marriage they would have children. Now, for child-birth, note 
immediately after tile marriage whether : 
(a) There would be child-births very soon, or 
(b) There would be some delay in child births or 
(c) There is denial of children, or combinations for childlessness. 
In all these cases the horoscope of the woman is more helpfUl. 
On the basis of the principles formulated, an astrologer can easily 
prepare an Astro-Gynaecological Checklist. 
THE CHECK LIST 
1. The date of marriage. 
2. The antardashas following the date of marriage. 
3. How many of these antardashas are helpful for child birth? 
4. How will the transits of Jupiter and Saturn be in the years 
following marriage. 
61 
Note: Here we are not dealing with rhe problem of childlessness. 
1. So, presuming that marriage performed is for the continuation 
of the human race, take up ftrst the case of an orthodox society, 
where a marriage is performed to have children. 
2. The variations that have to come into this analysis will not be 
discussed as they will apply to those societies where they may 
have marriages without wanting to have children or have their 
pregnancies terminated, if rhe woman conceives. 
3. There are some nations and societies all over the world where 
they allow children born out of wedlock to be accepted 
socially. In such cases, child-births without marriage, will have 
to be seen if the timing of the birth of children shows that 
children will be born without the marriage taking place. 
But to be able to do it, lot of data will have to be supplied by 
women who have children before getting married. It is not 
possible to work on this in the orthodox societies of India, where 
such cases are rare and even those rare cases are suppressed. There 
are of course instances of pregnancies, before marriages, termi­
nated, quietly, to avoid a social scandal. But there are fewer cases 
of child-births before marriage. 
Now in next chapter, instances will be given to show, how this 
astrological check-list gets applied and makes possible the 
prediction about the birth of children, but in normal cases only. 
CHAPTER SEVEN 
The Complex Area: 
Practical Illustrations 
THE FIRST EXAMPLE 
The first 'illustration that will be taken up to show the applica­
bility of the rules fonnulated will be that ofJohn F. Kennedy, the 
former Democrat President of USA. The horoscope being used 
here is what a friend who had gone to USA collected and is exactly 
the same which Dr. Raman, the editor of The Astrological 
M~gazine, Bangalore (India) had made use of, three decades ago. 
This horoscope is cast on the basis ofChitra Paksha Ayanamsha, 
or what is known as Lahiri's ephemeris, popularly. 
The Marriage 
This is not a book on timing marriages, which is being done by 
a group of researchers who have published many papers on the 
subject during the last eight years. They are being brought out 
in a separate volume.' 
Kennedy got married on September 12, 1953 in the mahadasha 
of Rahu and the antardasha of Mercury. 
There are so many combinarions for miscarriages for his wife 
in this horoscope that it appears that immediately after the 
marriage his wife had either some miscarriages or could not 
conceive. In the absence of her horoscope it is not possible to 
comment further on the subject. 
Kennedy's horoscope shows the following planets as child­
givers, Venus with Jupiter, the natural putrakaraka or child-giver, 
is the ninth lord in all the three horoscopes. Jupiter and Saturn 
aspect the fiftr house of the birth horoscope: Jupiter is in the fifth 
house in the N avamsha and in the Saptamsha is aspected by 
Saturn, the fifth lord of the Saptamsha while Jupiter himself 
aspects the ninth house. 
1. The first volume is in the press. 
Mars Sun1S'3' Ketu 25'43' Ven.24'2' 18'32' MerCUl}' Jup. 0'20' 
John F Kennedy Saturn 
May 29,1917 4'27' 
3.01 p.m. 
Moon Balance of Venus 
3y 3m Od 24'30' 
Rahu Lagna 
18'32' 27'37' 
y MD 
Date of Birth 1917 5 29 
Venus ends on 1920 8 29 
Sun 1926 8 29 
Moon 1936 8 29 
Mars 1943 8 29 
Ketu Sun 
Navamsha 
Jupiter Saturn 
Venus 
MerCUl}' Moon Lagna 
Mars Rahu 
Venus 
Rahu 
Sun 
Saturn 
Saptarnsha 
Moon 
Mars 
Jupiter Mercury Lagna 
Ketu 
RAHU 
Rahu-Ketu 
Rahu-Venus 
Rahu-Sun 
Rahu-Moon 
Rahu-Mars 
8 7 Moon 
Mars 
Mercury 
10 
Jupiter 11 
10 
Moon 
11 
Sun 
Saturn 
63 
Moon 
5 4 
Saturn 
3 Ketu 
Sun 
Venus 
1 Jupiter 
2 
Mars 
y M D 
1955 3 17 
1958 3 17 
1959 2 11 
1960 8 11 
1961 8 29 
Lagna 
Rahu 
6 
9 3 
12 
Ketu 2 Sun 
1 
6 
9 3 
64 
* 12 
11 
Daughter· 
* Nov. 27, 1957 
Moon Rahu-Venus 
* 
of Kennedy 
1 
Moon 
* 4 10 
7 * 
5 Mars 9 
Saturn Mars Jupiter 
6 8 
Jupiter Saturn 
* 
Mars * 2 12 11 Mars Moon 
Moon Son 
* Nov. 25, 1960 
* 
Rahu-Mars 
Moon of Kennedy 
JUf (R) 
2 AuJt Sat. ( ) 
1 
* * 4 10 Moon 7 9 
up. (R) 
5 15 A"j 
6 8 Sat(R 
5 ~Pt 
15 Sept 
• The Lagna not known. North Indian chart is based on natural zodiac. 
The First Child 
The first child of Kennedy was born on November 27, 1957 when he was running Rahu-Venus period. Venus, as has been analysed 
already, is a child-giving planet of this horoscope and being with Jupiter in the ninth house as the ninth lord, was indicating the time for the arrival of a child. 
The Transits 
Saturn in Scorpio was aspecting the fifth house of Kennedy. 
Jupiter in Virgo was aspecting the fifth house similarly. Mars from Libra was aspecting the fifth house. 
The Second Child 
The second child of Kennedy, a son was born on November 25, 1960, conceived in Rahu-Moon period. Here the Moon in the fifth house of the Saptamsha is a qualified child-giver. 
65 
Special Point 
Now comes in an additional principle. Always see the eleventh 
lord and the eleventh house, which being the fifth house from 
the seventh house (the spouse) is also the house of children. His 
eleventh lord is the Moon so there is a natural child-giving 
qualification attached to it. In the Saptamsha it being in the fifth 
house, the Moon is a child-giver. 
Mars is aspected by the fifth lord, Saturn in the birth 
horoscope, aspects the ninth house in the N avamsha and aspects 
the fifth house in the Saptamsha. 
The Transits 
In interpreting the transits the special rules applicable to retro­
gression come into play here. Satusn retrograde in Sagittarius till 
September 15, 1960 gives effect, additionally, from the previous 
house, Scorpio, also. From Scorpio, Saturn aspects the fifth 
house, the ninth house and the ninth lord. 
Similarly Jupiter was retrograde in Sagittarius till August 20, 
1960, giving effect from Scorpio from where it aspects the ninth 
house, the ninth lord and the fifth lord, Saturn in Cancer. 
Mars was in Gemini from where it aspected the fifth house. 
The Moon was in the fifth house, Capricorn and moved into 
Aquarius all within seventy two hours. 
This is the example of a male whose wife's horoscope is not 
available to us. Now we will take up the example of a female 
whose husband's horoscope is not available to us. 
THE SECOND EXAMPLE 
Qyeen Elizabeth II 
As a contrast to the horoscope of Kennedy the horoscope of the 
Qyeen of England, Elizabeth II presents a happier picture of 
child births, with less or no mishaps.' The reason for this must 
be rioted down first. Her fifth lord Venus is with Jupiter, a natural 
child-giver, while her fifth house receives the aspect af Saturn(R) 
which has given upsetting experiences to her after they grew up, 
2. The ~een could have had six pregnancies. 
66 
Mercwy 
Venus 
Jupiter 
Lagn. 
Mars 
Keru 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Lagna 
Moon 
Jupiter 
Mars 
Sun 
Oileen Elizabeth II 
April 2, 1926 
1.40 GMT 
London 
Saturn 
(R) 
0·21' 
07'29' 
19°18' 
Venus 
Rahu 
Navamsha 
Mercury 
Ketu 
Jupiter 
Keru Sun 
Saturn 
« 
-. 
Saptarnsha 
Mereu!), Rahu 
Rahu 
Moon 
Sun 
2 
3 
Rahu 
Mars 28°04' 
Mercury 12·14' 
Jupiter (R) 0°01' 
Sun 
Saturn 
. Venus 
Rahu 
Mars 
Venus 
Moon 
Lagna 
10 
1 7 
4 
"Moon 
Venus 
Saturn (R) 
Rahu 
Saturn 
5 
21°14' 
1°35' 
21°10' 
6 Mars 
5 
Rahu 7 1 Ketu 
10 
8 
Mereu 
9 
Mars 
67 
Vimshottari dasha of Qiteen Elizabeth II 
Y M D 
Venus antardashas 
Venus-Yen ends 1950 5 12 
Venus-Sun 1951 5 12 
Venus-Moon 1953 1 12 
Venus-Mars 1954 3 12 
Moon Rahu 
Nov. 13 Moon 
Prince Charles Lagna 
Nov. 14, 1948 
Venus-Venus 
of the <2!1een Saturn 
Mars Mercury Jupiter Jupiter Venus 
Oct 7. 1948 Ketu 
Jupiter Princess Anne" Moon 
Aug. 15, 1950 (A'g 13) 
Venus-Mars Saturn 
of the Qyeen Moon 
Mars 
Prince Edward" 
Feb. 19, 1960 
Venlls-Saturn 
of the Qyeen 
Saturn Moo, 
Jupiter Jup. 0 .... 21) 
Mars M .. 0" .. ~ 
Venus-Rahu 
Venus-Jupiter 
Venus-Saturn 
Venus-Mercwy 
Venus-Kern 
Saturn 
6 5 
Venus 
Y M D 
1957 3 12 
1959 11 12 
1963 1 12 
+965 11 12 
1967 1 12 
4 Mercury 7 1 
Ketu 8 10 
Mars 
Moon 4 
(Aug. 13) 
5 Saturn 
Moo 6 
1 
4 10 
7 
.. The Lagna is not known. North Indian chart is based on natural zodiac 
68 
Jupiter 
Saturn 
Moon 
Mars 
Mars 
Oan.3) 
F Durth Child' 
March 10, 1964 
Venus-Merucry 
of the QIeen 
2 
3 
Jupiter 
12 11 
Saturn 
,. The Lagna is not known. North Indian chart is based on natural wdiac, 
married and divorced, offending, it appeared, public sentiments of 
English people. 
The eleventh lord (the fifth from the seventh house) is Mars exalted, receiving the aspect of Saturn but being exalted Mars has not given her much trouble in delivering her four babies. 
In the Saptamsha the fifth lord is again Mars, exalted and without any aspects. In the Navamsha, Venus is the fifth lord aspected by two benefics, Jupiter and Mercury and two malefics, Saturn and Mars. But here Saturn is the Lagna lord while Mars is aspecting its own house. 
Similar safe and protected fifth lord can be seen in the horoscope of Prince Charles given in the introduction along with the horoscope of his wife, Diana. There may have been no complications in the birth of their children also, it appears. 
A special technique 
Add the longitudes, in the case of a woman, of the Moon, Mars and Jupiter, and after expunging the multiples of360·, note the house where it falls. Then treating it as a planet with degrees of its own, 
put it in the Navamsha and the Saptamsha. Here adding the Moon (109'18'), Mars (298'4') and Jupiter (300'01') we get 607"22'. 
expunging 360·, the remainder is 247"22' which falls in Sagittarius at 7'22'. In the Navamsha it falls in Gemini and in the Saptamsha 
it occupies Capricorn. It is not afflicted anywhere but it falls in odd rashis, Sagittarius and Gemini in the birth horoscope and ' the Navarnsha; and an even rashi in the Saptamsha. (Rahu-Ketu 
afflictions are ignored unless other malefics too join them.) 
69 
Qyeen Elizabeth II was married on November 20, 1947 in the 
longest Vimshottari dasha of Venus (twenty years) her fifth lord, 
favouring child-birth. 
A young woman who marries at the age of twenty or twenty 
one and runs into the twenty year long period of Venus, her fifth 
lord, which is unafflicted, has been given by God twenty long 
years to produce her babies. This is what doctors and gynaecologists 
cannot know, unless they learn Vedic astrology. 
Child-Giving Antardashas 
Now if the fifth house of the birth horoscope is seen, Venus the 
fifth lord is with Jupiterand Saturn which aspects the fifth house 
promise children. 
In the Saptamsha, Mars as the fifth lord, and Mercury in the 
fifth house, and then Saturn and Sun aspecting the fifth house 
promise children. 
The Qyeen of England performed no miracle. by getting 
pregnant immediately after her marriage and delivering the first 
baby of hers within eleven months of her marriage. It was a period 
of maximum fertility, the dasha of her excellent fifth lord, Venus 
and the antardasha too of Venus. 
In the Venus-Mars, another baby-producing period she 
delivered her second child, Princess Ann«. 
The mahadasha of Venus was continuing so after a pause of 
ten years in Venus-Saturn period she delivered her third child, 
Prince Edward. 
It appeared to the world that the Qyeen was stopping at baby 
number three, but the dasha of Venus was continuing. Venus­
Mercury period was not over yet and Mercury, as the ninth lord 
of the birth horoscope in the fifth house of the Saptamsha helped 
produce her fourth child. 
Then came the antardasha of Ketu, not a qualified child giver, 
followed by the mahadasha of the Sun which was the end of her 
excellent period of the fifth lord. 
The Transits 
The transits ·can be discussed briefly thus: Saturn aspected the 
fifth house of the Qyeen in the first tWo births, and was on the 
fifth lord in the case of the fourth birth. In the case of the third 
70 
birth Saturn, retrograde till September 6, 1959, gave effect from 
Scorpio also, even other wise from Sagittarius it aspects the fifth 
lord. 
Apply the rules in the case of Jupiter as explained earlier. 
In three cases Mars aspected the. fifth house while in one case 
the seventy five day rule applied. 
The Moon fulfilled the seventy-two hours rule in all cases. 
There is a hundred percent replication here too. 
But the most significant point to be noted here is the 
importance of the dasha of the fifth lord of full twenty years in 
which period the Olleen became mother four times with a gap 
of three years, then ten years and then four years. It is being 
pointed out because in Vedic astrology it is easy to see it, which 
doctors and others cannot know. 
The Great Importance of the Saptamsha 
It is difficult for astrologers who do not work on the divisional 
horoscopes of Vedic astrology to give fine predictions which can 
be categorised as 'inter-linked destinies'. It is not possible to 
establish the correctness of the degrees of a horoscope unless 
relevant divisional horoscopes are brought into play. A stray 
success with a prediction or two does not prove a horoscope to 
be correct. The latest instance before astrologers of India is the 
horoscope of Bill Clinton, the president of USA. Two Indian 
astrologers made predictions on Cancer as his Lagna as late as 
August 1992 or even later, when the near-infallible opinion polls 
of USA had made it amply clear that · George Bush had no chance 
of winning and that Clinton was going to be the clear winner. 
One opportunistic astrologer made a bold prediction on 
Cancer Lagna and proclaimed that Clinton would win. But he 
never verified how on this horoscope, Clinton could have two fathers, 
only one daughter and a highly educated wife - none of which get 
reflected in Cancer Lagna horoscope of Clinton.3 Later, The 
Astrological Magazine was helped by .some US astrologers who 
passed on the birth time of Clinton which gave Virgo as his Lagna 
where Clinton's two fathers, only daughter, education outside the 
country and his victory in the presidential elections of 1992 get 
explained clearly. 
3. These are typical habits of fraudulent astrologers of India. 
71 
It is easier to talk of the use of the divisional horoscopes but very 
difficult to interpret them, even if they are correct. Yet. not to be able 
to bring into use some of these divisional horoscopes is the biggest 
handicap astrologers are working under, and, committing serious 
mistakes. 
In this book, the Saptamsha is being used to show how 
. effectively, it should be brought into use to give predictions about 
children. Old astrologers who were using it and never taught it 
to anyone, have done a lot of damage to astrology. The modern 
astrologers do not know its use at all as they fancy that they can 
do without divisional horoscopes. In India we have astrologers who 
are more interested in prescribing 'upaya' {remedies} without knowing 
what is the ailment visible from the horoscope, and whether, it is 
curable at all or not. Between these two types of astrologers, those 
who have been doing astrology with some discipli!,e but without 
knowing the use of divisional horoscopes and those who prescribe 
mere 'upaya' without reading a horoscope properly, the metho­
dological discipline of the great tradition of Vedic astrology is 
getting lost. 
What is the way out? One clear way out of this is to go deeper 
and deeper into Jaimini astrology. But here we encounter greater 
darkness of ignorance because there is no book on how to predict 
from Jaimini's dashas. Only five articles of mine which appeared 
in The Astrological Magazine in 1991 (January onwards) show how 
Jaimini's Chara dasha can actually be made use of for day-to-day 
predictions, and an over-all assessment of a horoscope. 
The other way out is to go deeper and deeper into the simple 
arithmetical problem of calculating the correct degree of the 
Lagna, correcting it, whenever it is not giving results. 
It has been my experience that ninety percent horoscopes have either 
wrong Navamsha or wrong Saptamsha, if the birth-time is wrong by 
five .to ten minutes. The degrees of the Lagna then will have to 
be corrected. To understand this process, first look at the 
following: 
The first part ends at 
The second part ends at 
The N avamsha 
3°20' 
6°40' 
The Saptamsha 
4°17' 
8°34' 
This way a table should be prepared first. 
72 
The second step is to see whether the events told by the 
consultor get revealed in the Navamsha and the Saptamsha. 
If they are not revealed, then obviously some correction is 
needed. 
The third step is to find out which of the two is correct. If both 
are wrong, then the work of correction is a very complex process: 
But in majority of cases, let us presume, one of them only is 
wrong. Then how to correct is not all that difficult. Now, suppose 
your judgement is that the Navamsha has to be the first and the 
Saptamsha also of the first part, there is no problem. 
But if the judgement of the astrologer is that the Navamsha 
is the second one but the Saptamsha the first one then it would' 
mean that the degrees of the Lagna will have to be less than 4°17' 
but not below 3°20'. Here the margin available for correction is 
0°57'. 
If the judgement is that the Navamsha has to be the second 
one and, the Saptamsha also the second one then the degrees of 
the Lagna will have to be more than 4°17' and less than 6'40'. 
Like this one goes on working out. It can be the third 
N avamsha but second Saptamsha: third Saptamsha and third 
Navamsha etc. 
The need for pointing it out arises from the fact that in our 
research on the sex of the child, a wrong Saptamsha gives us 
wrong results: a wrong Saptamsha can turn a horoscope promising 
healthy children into diseased and crippled ones : a wrong 
Saptamsha can put an astrologer on a totally wrong track in his 
predictions concerning 'inter-linked destinies.' What is meant by 
inter-linked destinies is that when something great is going to 
happen to an individual in his career there can be tragic 
involvement of a child in an accident also. Both can happen at 
the same time, within the same antardasha. 
All this is being said to state the one ultimate truth that no 
astrologer can ever master the total methodology of Vedic 
astrology which is so vast. Within the vast varieties of method­
ologies available in Vedic astrology, our aim should be to shape 
a dependable and safe tool of prediction. For this purpose an 
astrologer should get the following information invariably. 
1. Is the consultor married? 
73 
2. If married, does he have children? 
3. If he has children, when were they born? 
4. If the children are healthy, what is the astrological explanati~n 
for it? 
5. If the children are unhealthy or diseased, what is the 
astrological explanation for it? 
6. If not married but still has children, (we enter a very complex 
area) can it be explained astrologically? 
7. The children are healthy but their mother is diseased. Can this 
be explained? 
Series of such questions can be posed and it will be found that 
there is no astrologer in the world who can deal with all the 
complex problems, of- 'inter-linked destinies.' Till an astrologer 
succeeds in this area, he can never be sure that he is working on 
a correct horoscope. 
I have committed mistakes in predictions when I had to base it 
sometimes on a particular divisional haroscope which turned out to be 
wrong, later. The discredit of a wrong prediction was my share 
of an agony which I have had to share with the consultor who 
had expected me to be 'accurate' without his or her realising that 
the birth time given by him or her was wrong. 
To wriggle out of such situations, a composite technique as is 
now being taught to the students of the Bharatiya Vidya Bhawan, 
Delhi Chapter One, has been found very helpful. 
So let it be kept in mind that no astrologer can be super­
brilliant. If he does only fortune telling, it then is a mockery of 
astrology. Ifhe goes deeper into divisional horoscopes, it is sound 
astrology: if he adopts the composite methods it is incisively 
sound astrology which helps in a very fine delineation of a 
horoscope, within which life's events fall into an explainable 
astrological pattern. With that aim, in view, the Saptamsha 
should be used. 
Practical Example of Correcting Lagna 
This horoscope was given with the computer cast degrees and the 
incidents mentioned below the horoscope with the approximate 
dasha -periods noted down. 
74 
Saturn 
(R) 
Mars 
Jupiter 
Moon 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Mars 
Jupiter 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Ketu 
Ketu 
Nov. 8, 1937 
7.00 a.m. 
Delhi 
BaJ. of Venus: 
17y2m14d 
Lagna 
Rahu Mercury 
Sun 
26'11' 
22'14' 
15'11' 
Lagna 
Sun 
Ketu 
Venus 
Lagna 
? 
Navamsha 
Venus 
Rahu 
Lagna 
? 
Saptamsha 
Saturn 
Venus 
. 
Mars 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
Mercury 
Saturn 
Moon 
Jupiter 
Mars 
Rahu 
4'15' 
28'05' 
28'59' 
Lagna 
? 
2 
Venus 
Saturn (R) 
Rahu 
1 
9 
7 
Lagna 
Sun Moon 
12 
Jupiter 3 9 
6 
Mars4 
5 
Rahu 
1'04' 
5' 49' 
13'01' 
Jupiter 
9 
8 
Notable Events: Marriage: Nov. 16,1968 (Moon- Venus). Son born on 
Nov 26, 1969 (Moon-Ketu). Daughter born on Jan. 1, 1974 (Moon­
Sat). Son died of heart attack: April 10, 1988 (Rahu-Mercury). 
75 
Two incidents strike you at once as not being explainable 
astrologically. The marriage took place in Moon- Ketu or Moon­
Venus: in either case the Navamsha Lagna should be Aries with 
Ketu in the Lagna and Venus in the seventh. Is Taurus Navamsha 
appropriate? That is the first question. 
Then to have a chid within one year of marriage the fifth lord 
of the birth horoscope or the Saptamsha has to come into 
operation. So the second. question is : can Aries Saptamsha be 
accepted as correct? 
Now shift the Navamsha to Aries and the Saptamsha to Pisces 
and read the incidents given below. 
Son born in Moon- Venus is a son born with some defect or 
deformity. Put a question mark. 
Daughter born in Mars Saturn is explained because Mars is in 
the fifth house and Saturn aspects the fifth house of the 
Saptamsha. 
More Important: If Aries were the Saptamsha Lagna, the fifth 
house would have Rahu and there would have been chances of 
having children in the Rahu period also. 
Then other corrections were done which are not being 
discussed here: he is the eldest among four brothers: he is in the 
air-force. 
These led to the correction of his Lagna as being between 20 
and 21 degrees. 
Then come to April 10, 1988 and see Rahu in the sixth house 
of the Saptamsha, Mercury, the seventh lord, in the second house. 
The tragedy of the death of his son is explained. 
This person comes from a family which is not at all astrology 
conscious. Can you blame him? 
An Example of a Horoscope Verified Properly 
The Marriage took place in Saturn mahadasha, Moon antardasha 
and Mercury pratyantar dasha. 
The Birth of a Son in Saturn mahadasha, Mars antardasha and 
Jupiter pratyantar dasha. 
Note: Mars aspects the fifth lord, Jupiter in the birth horoscope. 
The Birth of Twin daughters in Saturn mahadasha, Jupiter 
antardahsa and Venus pratyantar dasha. 
76 
Moon 
Ketu 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Mercury 
Moon 
Venus 
Rahu 
Sun 
Mercury 
Mars 
(R) 
Male 
Nov. 7, 1943 
Bal. of Rahu 
4y4mOd 
Sun Lagna Mercurty 
6'30' 
20'43' 
18'47' 
Jupiter 
Sun 
Navamsha 
Saturn 
Moon 
Venus Rahu 
Mars 
Saptamsha 
Ketu . 
Saturn 
(R) 
Rahu 
Jupiter 
Venus 
Mars (R) 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
Ketu 
Lagna 
Mars 
Lagna 
Saturn 
Jupiter 
12 
1 
28'30' 
18' 38' 
1'54 
5 4 
Jupiter 
8 
11 5 
2 
Mars (R) 
Venus 
Sun 
MerCUri); 
7 6 
Venus 
Jupiter 
4 Rahu 
3 
Saturn 
(R) 
4'23' 
Saturn (R) 2'55' 
Rahu 18"01 
1 
Jupiter 
12 Sun 
Mercury 
Moon 
11 
Sun 
Mercury 
10 
Note: In the birth horoscope all the three are related to the fifth 
house: Saturn aspects the the fifth house. 
Some astrologers go further down to the sookshma dashas. 
This is a cumbersome process and can be avoided unless a' 
computer is programmed properly to check such events. 
(' 
CHAPTER EIGHT 
Astro-Medical Approach: 
Delayed Childbirths 
lJ1'! &11 &1 GQ '11 '1t<l wn~ '1Tfu1 'It ~ I 
crc;~ ~. <I~ ~II 
Mama laalapyamaanasya sutaartham naast; va; sukham. 
Tadartham hayamedhena yakshyameeti matirmama. 
I am going crazy fot not having a son. There is no peace or bliss. 
] now wish to perform the Hayamedha sacrifice for getting 
progeny. This is my resolution. 
If doctors knew astrology and astrologers had some familiarity 
with medical diagnosis of cases of delayed births it would help 
many of those couples who want tQ have a child but do not know 
at all whether they can have a child in time, or will there be some 
delay. Here perhaps the doctor has no sure method of timing the 
likely year of the birth of the child. He can only give his medical 
verdict that the couple are normal and can have children. 
The astrologer can help such couples by distinguishing 
between cases of delay and cases where the obstructions are so 
many that they will almost become cases of denial of children. 
So prepare an astro-medical check list thus : 
ASTRO-MEDICAL CHECK LIST 
1. Examine the fifth· hous~ from the Lagna. 
2. Examine the lord of the fifth house from the Lagna. 
3. Examine the fifth house from the Saptamsha Lagna. 
4. Examine the fifth lord from the Saptamsha Lagna. 
5. Mark out the qualified child-giving planets. 
6. Note when their antardashas are coming. 
78 
7. Now examine the transits of Saturn and Jupiter first; then of 
Mars and the Moon. 
Note: When a woman conceives, Mars aspects either herftfth house 
or the fifth lord. 
Again when a woman delivers her baby, Mars peifOrms the 
same functions. 
The difference between a normal and an abnormal case can be 
understood if the horoscope of Qyeen Elizabeth II is kept in view 
as a normal case. Some cases being discussed in this section are 
cases of abnormal delay in the birth of a baby, as visible from the 
horoscope of its parents. 
EXAMPLE ONE <Case studyoj' a prediction) 
Husband 
Married in 1978 but they had no children till 1984 December. 
The father of the wife of this person said that they had planned 
to have no child so soon, which appeared to be a sound piece of 
logic as his daughter was married at the age of nineteen. 
But the male's horoscope did not show any denial of children. 
There are some factors of delay but now it had to come to an end. 
Now apply the check list to this case. 
1. The fifth house from the Lagna is afflicted as both the sixth 
and the eighth lords and Mercury <an impotent) aspect the 
fifth house. 
2. The fifth lord Venus is excellently placed, though in the 
twelfth house and receives the most helpful aspect ofJupiter. 
3. In the Saptamsha Lagna Rahu in the fifth house receives the 
aspect of Jupiter who is the fifth lord itsel£ 
4. The fifth lord, Jupiter is with Mars and receives the aspect of 
Venus, none of them owning any obstructing houses for child 
birth. 
5. The Venus mahadasha was coming to an en~/with Ketu as 
its last antardasha, occupying the fiv'e-eleven axis in the 
Saptamsha. 
6. Venus as the fifth lord of the birth horoscope is a qualified 
Lagna 
Mars 
Rahu 
Venus 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Lagna 
Mars 
Moon 
Ketu 
Mercury 
Venus 
Rahu 
Jupiter 
(R) 
Example one 
Husband 
Nov. 19, 1952 
Bal. of Mercury 
5yllm27d 
Sun 
Mercury 
Moon 
6"31' 
2"38' 
25"18' 
Navamsha 
Jupiter 
Sun 
Saptamsha 
Moon 
Mercury 
Ketu 
Saturn 
Mars 
Mercury 
Jupiter (R) 
Sun 
Rahu 
Venus 
Saturn 
Keto 
Lagna 
Jupiter 
Mars 
Saturn 
4"48 
23"14' 
21"15' 
11 
12 Lagna 
Mars Rahu 
10 
Jupiter 1 7 
(R) 4 
Ketu 
Venus 
Saturn 
Rahu 
10"56' 
29"20' 
22"38' 
79 
child-giver: Ketu aspected by the eleventh lord, Mars in the 
birth horoscope, occupies the excellent eleventh house in the 
Saptamsha, inspite of the aspect of Satur6, which may show 
the need for surgical intervention for tife delivery of the baby. 
80 
7. In the beginning of1985 Saturn was in Scorpio aspecting the fifth house of the birth horoscope and the fifth lord of the Saptamsha Lagna. Jupiter was in Sagittarius of the husband on his fifth lord, Venus. Then, most important, Mars at the end of 1984 and the beginning of 1985 had transited from 
Sagittarius, where the fifth Lord is placed, to Aquarius from where it aspected the fifth house. 
Wife 
Now examine the horoscope of the wife similarly: 
1. The fifth house of the birth horoscope has the aspect of the Moon, the fourth lord, and, no other aspect. 
2. The fifth lord has gone to the twelfth house and is with Ketu 
and the sixth lord Mercury which explains the delay. 
3. The fifth house of the Saptamsha Lagna receives two malefic aspects, one of Saturn from the eighth house which is not helpful as Saturn is also the sixth lord here. The aspect of Mars is not unhelpful, as it being the fourth and the ninth lord is a yoga-producing planet for Leo natives. 
4. The fifth lord Jupiter in the eleventh house with his friend, Mars, aspects his own house (in the Saptamsha). 
5. The child giving planets in the birth horoscope are the Sun and Mercury and, Ketu, being with the Sun, qualify to be child-givers. This promise is re-inforced by the aspect of the ninth lord, Jupiter, but from the eighth house, which explains 
the delay. In the Saptamsha Jupiter, Mars and Saturn become child-givers. 
6. The dasha was Saturn-Mercury both child-givers. 
7. Saturn from Scorpio aspected the fifth house: Jupiter from 
Sagittarius also aspected the fifth house. Mars, already 
explained, was in Aquarius at the end of 1984 aspecting the fifth house of the wife, to help her conceive. 
She became a mother in September 1985. 
They had wanted to postpone the birth of the child for some more years, said the father of the girl. But planets did not allow it. 
Sun Ketu 
Mercury 
(R) 
Moon 
Saturn 
Lagna 
·Sun 
Moon 
Moon 
Sun 
Ketu 
Sat 
Sun 
Ketu 
Lagna 
Venus 
Example One 
Wife 
April 5, 1959 
Bal. of Rahu 
4yllm 12d 
Jupiter 
(R) 
21'1 9' 
21'0' 
16'20' 
Navamsha 
Venus Lagna Mars 
Moon 
Saptamsha 
Mercury 
Mars 
Rahu 
Mars 
Mercury (R) 
Jupiter (R) 
Rahu 
Saturn 
Jupiter 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
Mars 
Rahu 
Lagna 
Venus 
3 2 
Mars 
56 
3'42' 
9'35' 
8' 15' 
Venus 
Mar> 
8 
Lagna 
Venus 
I 
4 10 
7 
Venus 
Saturn 
Rahu 
Ketu 9 Lagna 
7 
Sun 10 4 
1 
11 
Moon 
12 
Venus 
6 
7 
Mercury 
Lagna 
5 
8 2 
81 
9 
Saturn 
8 
Jupiter 
(R) 
24'56' 
13'41' 
19'15' 
Rahu 
4 3 
Jupiter 
ars 
Moon 
82 
EXAMPLE TWO 
Husband 
Married in May 1988. Apply the points given in Check-list. 
Venus 
Ketu 
Mercury 
Sun 
Saturn 
Jupiter 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Ketu 
Saturn 
Mars 
Mercwy 
Moon 
Example Two 
Husband 
Jan. 24, 1961 
Bal. of Ketu : 
OylmSd 
Lagna 
13"47' 
10"32' 
13"08' 
Sun 
Navamsha 
Lagna 
Jupiter 
Ketu 
Saptamsha 
Rahu 
Mars 
(R) 
Rahu 
Mars (R) 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
Venus 
Moon 
MerCUI)' 
Rahu 
Saturn 
Jupiter 
Moon 
Mars 
Lagna 
Venus 
Sun 
Saturn , 
upiter 
10 9 
Mercurr. 
Sun 
Venus 
Ketu S Rahu 
7"49' 
22"13' 
26"05' 
12 1 
Moon 
Venus 
Saturn 
Rahu 
Lagna 
Venus 
5 
4 
3 
Mars (R) 
2r13 ' 
28"S9' 
14"49' 
7 
6 
Ketu 
1 
12 
83 
1. The fifth house is without any blemish. 
2. The fifth lord, Jupiter is with Saturn and is aspected by a retrograde Mars, the Lagna and the sixth lord, but from the eighth house, which shows some delay. 
3. In the Saptamsha, Jupiter aspects Mercmy in the fifth house promising a child but Saturn as the sixth lord with the fifth lord Jupiter alSo. aspects the fifth house. 
4. The fifth lord of the Saptamsha, Jupiter is with the sixth lord, 
Saturn, obstructing child-birth. 
S. The dasha of the Moon was running. As the ninth lord the Moon is a qualified child giver but in the sixth house. The aspect of the fifth lord Jupiter however strengthens the resolve of the Moon to give a child. The other child givers are Saturn and Mars in the birth horoscope and Mercury in the fifth house in the Saptamsha. 
6. Jupiter and Saturn antardashas gave to him a daughter who died and made his wife very nervous. An assurance was given astrologically that in 1992 there would be no such difficulty in the Moon-Mercury period. 
7. Jupiter would move into Virgo, Saturn was already in Capricorn, both aspecting the fifth house. In January 1992 Mars from Sagittarius would aspect his fifth house to help his wife conceive. 
Wife 
1. The fifth lord has gone to the sixth house. 
2. The fifth house is blemishless. 
3. In the Saptamsha the fifth house is again blemishless. 
4. The fifth lord is .speeted by two malefics, by Saturn from the 
twelfth house and the Sun from the eighth ho~. . 
Note: The Moon falling under the Rahu-Ketu axis in the Saptamsha 
is the ftar psychosis she had developed after her first child died. 
S. She was passing through the Rahu dasha who is with the ninth 
lord Venus and qualifies to be a ehild giver. The antardasha 
84 
was of Mercury, the fifth lord of the Saptamsha Lagna, the 
best qualification for Mercury to have. 
6. Jupiter would move into Virgo and aspect the fifth house and 
Saturn 
Ketu 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Lagna 
Sun 
Venus 
Saturn 
Rahu 
Moon 
Ketu 
Moon 
Sun 
Mercury 
Mars Sun , 
Jupiter 
Example Two 
Wife 
May 20,1964 
Bal. of Sun: 
5y2m8d 
09'15 ' 
06'01' 
28"27' 
Navamsha 
Saturn Lagna 
Saptamsha 
Rahu 
Venus 
Moon 
Lagna 
Mars 
MereuI)' 
Jupiter 
Merucy 
KeN 
Mars 
Jupiter 
Mercury 
Mars 
Jupiter 
Rahu 
Venus 
16' 11' 
11'40' 
15'43' 
8 
10 
7 
Ketu 
11 
Moon 
Lagna 
6 
9 
12 
Venus 
Saturn 
Rahu 
3 
Venus 
12' 01 
11' 18' 
10'34' 
Lagna 
2 Ketu 11 8 Moon 
85 
Saturn was already in Capricorn, in first week of February 
1992 Mars would be in Capricorn in the fifth house, to help 
her conceive. 
She conceived in February 1992 and delivered a daughter in 
October when Mars reached Gemini and again aspected her fifth 
house, Capricorn, and the fifth lord of the baby's father, Jupiter 
in Sagittarius. 
EXAMPLE THREE 
The horoscope of the wife is not available. No prediction was 
given in this case. The niarriage took place in 1973. 
1. The fifth lord has gone into the sixth house and is with the 
Sun and retrograde Mercury. A factor for delay or denial? 
2. The fifth house receives the aspect of the sixth lord, Mars, • 
f.ctor for delay. 
3. In the Saptamsha the sixth lord, Mars is again in the &i:cthto'f..\l., 
house asl'ectea By Mars m.Jcing it a difficult case. But there 
is the .spect of Jupiter, the fifth lord himself helped by another 
benefic, Mercury from his house of exaltation. 
4. The fifth lord of the Saptamsh., Jupiter is with • benefic 
Mercury but is aspected by the sixth lord, Mars, who is also 
Example Three 
Husband 
Dec. 8, 1945 
Moon Bal. of Sun: 
ly9m4d 
Sun 
Ketu M,rcury (R 
Venus 
Lagna 
Rahu 
Saturn (R) 
Mars (R) 
Jupiter 
2 
1 
11 
10 
Lagna 21"30' Mars (R) 10"01' Venus 9"52' 
Sun 23"02 Mercury (R) 2"15' Saturn (R) 0"56' 
Moon 6"04' Jupiter 28"24' Rahu 6"53' 
Married in 1973. Jupiter mahadash. started from September 13, 1982 
and Jupiter-Jupiter lasted upto October 31, 1984 
86 
Lagna 
Moon 
Navamsha 
Sun 
Mercury 
Rahu Mars 
Mars 
Saptamsha 
Saturn 
Ketu 
Lagna Sun 
Ketu 
Saturn 
Jupiter 
Venus 
Venus 
Rahu 
Moo n 
Mercwy 
Jupiter 
2 
Ketu3 
Saturn 
10 9 Saturn 
Ketu 
12 
Mars 
1 
Lagna 
8 
11 5 
2 
the Lagna lord and so a helpful planet also. 
12 11 
Moon 
Sun 
6 
Moon 
4 
Venus 
3 Rahu 
5. The marriage took place in the dash. of Rahu who does not 
qualifY to be a child-giver. So the Rahu period gave no child. 
From September 1982 the dasha ofJupiter started who is the 
qualified child giver of the Saptamsha. 
6. In 1983 the antardasha would be that of Jupiter in the 
mahadasha of Jupiter, which will be the best period. 
7. In 1983 Saturn was in Libra the fifth house and Jupiter in 
Scorpio on the fifth lord. 
In 1983 he had his first child after ten years of marriage. 
EXAMPLE FOUR 
This is a highly interesting case in which no prediction was given 
but the phenomenon was studied after the event. He told me that 
Rahu 
Saturn 
(R) 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Sun Mars Mercury 
Example Four 
Husband 
June 12, 1932 
Bal. of Sun: 
4y7m 10d 
2'28' 
27'56' 
29'45' 
Lagna 
Venus 
Jupiter 
Ketu 
Moon 
Mars 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
Jupiter 
5 
Ketu 4 
Moon 
Lagna 
Venus 
3 
6 12 
9 
87 
11 
7 Rahu 
29' 40' 
26'24' 
25'23' 
8 10 
Saturn (R) 
Venus 
Saturn (R) 
Rahu 
22'05' 
11'12' 
28'42' 
Rahu dasha started on January 22, 1954. 
Rahu-Venus was from August 10, 1965 to August 10, 1968. 
Venus 
Saturn 
Jupiter 
Navamsha 
Mars 
Ketu Lagna 
Moon 
Sun 
[Mercury 
Ketu 
Moon 
Saptamsha 
Venus Mars 
Rahu 
Mercury 
Sun 
Lagna 
Jupiter 
Rahu 7 
Saturn 
Lagna 
Jupiter 
3 
Saturn 6 12 
9 
.,3. 
Rahu 
2 
Mercury 
Sun 
~T-
1 
88 
an astrologer had prepared the horoscope of his wife when she 
was a young girl and wrote on it that she would get married round 
about her twenty fourth year but would have her first child at the 
age of thirty-two. Her horoscope is not available. However the 
husband's horoscope was obtained and examined. 
1. He was married in 1959. Here the fifth house receives the 
aspect of retrograde Saturn from the eighth house. But Saturn 
is aspeeted by Jupiter toning down its aggressive intentions to 
deny children. 
2. The fifth lord, Venus is retrograde and so, erratic in promise. 
3. In the Saptamsha the sixth lord Mars is in the fifth house but 
is again aspected by Jupiter, toning down the aggressive 
intentions of Mars to obstruct the birth of children. 
4. The fifth lord of the Saptamsha, Venus is in the sixth house 
aspected by the Sun, Mercury (Lagna lord) but the eighth lord 
Saturn also. 
Note: Saturn is also the ninth lord in both the horoscopes and 
so a qualified child-giver. 
5. The qualified child-givers are Venus, Saturn, Rahu (ninth 
house) Jupiter and Mars. 
6. After 1965 Rahu- Venus period started, excellent for the birth 
of a baby. 
7. In the second half of1967 Saturn was in Pisces but retrograde 
in the ninth house and Jupiter in Leo aspecting the ninth 
house. Mars transiting between Scorpio and Sagittarius helped 
his wife conceive, because the fifth lord, Venus was repeatedly 
aspected by Mars. On September 1968 when Saturn was in 
Aries, aspecting the fifth house and the fifth lord, and Jupiter 
and Mars in Leo aspecting the ninth house, his wife prepared 
to deliver a baby. The Moon that day moved into Gemini. 
EXAMPLE FIVE 
1. He was married between 1942 and 1944 in Jupiter mahadasha 
and antardasha of Venus. 
2. He had no children for seventeen years after marriage. 
89 
3. He then took spiritual initiation after his Saturn mahadasha 
began, which was after 1950. The ninth lord gave him a guru. 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Venus 
Rahu 
Moon 
Ketu 
Example Feve 
Husband 
Oct. 6, 1918 
Bal. of Rahu : 
16y6m22d 
Mars 
Rahu 
23'11' 
19'57' 
7"44' 
Lagna 
Moon 
Saturn Mercury 
Jupiter 
Navamsha 
Mars 
Ketu 
Venus 
Saptamsha 
Lagna 
Jupiter Rahu 
Moon 
Lagna 
Jupiter 
Saturn 
Venus 
MerCury 
Sun 
Mars 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
Sun 
Ketu 
Mercury 
Sun 
Mars 
Saturn 
10'57' 
13'30' 
21"51' 
12 
9 
Venus 
Saturn 
Rahu 
Lagna 
Saturn 
Lagna 
Jupiter 
Moon 
7'50' 
2'01' 
23'50' 
Venus 
Saturn 
4 
Sun 
3 ars 
Mercury 
/ 
90 
4. The guru asked him to do his worship properly and overcome 
the obstacles to child-birth. 
5. In Saturn-Venus dasha he had his only child, a son. 
6. Jupiter was in Libra in the early part of 1959 and Saturn was 
in Sagittarius. Jupiter in the fifth house and Saturn aspecring 
the fifth lord ensured the. birth of a baby in Saturn-Venus 
period which are qualified child-givers. 
Summary of these five .cases 
An important principle of esoteric astrology must be remembered 
and applied to these horoscop~s. The fifth house is the house of 
spiritual merit of the past life. When the fifth house and its lord 
gets afflicted it prevents the birth of children or gives other related 
problems. These principles will be stated later under obstructions 
to child birth. 
The ninth house and the ninth lord represent the spiritual 
merit of this life. The obstacles created in child birth can be 
overcome through proper spiritual remedial measures and medical 
treatment. Ayurveda, the Indian system of medicine coming 
down to us from Vedic times, combines astrology with medical 
treatment. No sane astrologer will ever tell a person not to do both 
simultaneously, proper worship and medical treatment. 
The twelfth house is the best of the esoteric houses. Birth of 
children connected with the dasha and antardasha of planets 
connected with the fifth, ninth and the twelfth houses and their 
lords, assure the success of remedial measures. 
Against this background the cases given here are being 
analysed. 
Example One 
Here the fifth lord Venus is in the twelfth house and is aspected 
by Jupiter. Ketu is always a mysterious planet which in medical 
astrology invariably leads us to the conclusion that the doctor will 
not be able to diagnose the disease. Ketu, the planet of mystery, 
is the planet of surprises also. In this case, the male used wrong 
contraceptives which led to his miscalculated planning of the 
child birth. 
In the case of his wife, the child was born in Saturn dasha 
91 
which is in the ninth house and antardasha, of Mercury, which 
is in the twelfth house. 
Example Two 
In the case of the male the Moon is the ninth lord and Mercury 
in the third house of efforts, aspects the ninth house. Spiritual 
and medical measures worked well in this case. 
In the case of the wife it was the period of Rahu associated 
with the ninth lord, Venus. Mercury the antardasha lord is 
aspeeted by the fifth lord Saturn who aspects the twelfth house. 
Example Three 
Here the child was born in the mahadasha ofJupiter aspected by 
the ninth lord. Jupiter in turn aspects the twelfth house. 
Example Four 
Here Rahu is in the ninth house. Venus, the fifth lord is also the 
twelfth lord. 
Example Five 
Here the mahadasha lord is Saturn aspeeting both the ninth and 
the fifth and the twelfth houses. Venus is also the twelfth lord. 
In all these cases the nine-twelve house connections exist. 
Note: The points given here are tested principles. But should be 
applied to hundreds of horoscopes to establish as the most ---_'-. 
valuable guide to predicting the birth of children after --­
spiritual-medical remedies are resorted to. 
EXAMPLE SIX 
The case of the lady doctor 
This horoscope was discussed with the family astrologer of this 
lady doctor, sometime in 1979 and my prediction was that the 
first marriage would collapse. The arguments given need not be 
repeated as the afflicted seventh house and the seventh lord in 
the birth horoscope and the Navamsha make it amply clear. The 
marriage led to a lot of tension, and an attempt was made on the 
life of the lady doctor too. The family astrologer had not agreed 
92 
Rahu 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Moon 
Sun Venus 
jM:ercury 
Example Six 
A Lady 
Medical Doctor. 
May 21,1955 
Bal. of Sun 
3y 11m 5d 
FLagna 
Saturn 
25·01' 
6·27' 
1·16' 
(R) 
Mars 
Ketu 
Jupiter 
Mars 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
3'41· 
28·42 
2·41' 
11 
1 
7 
10 4 Jupiter 
1 
Venus 3 
Mars 
2 Ketu 
Moon 
Sun Mere. 
Venus 
Saturn (R) 
Rahu 
09·06' 
23·44' 
3·27' 
Events: The first marriage took place in the antardasha of Jupiter in 
the mahadasha of Rahu in 1979. Divorce took place in 1981. 
Lagna 
Saturn Venus 
Rahu 
Sun Jupiter 
Navamsha 
Moon 
Mars Mereu!) Ketu 
Lagna Venus 
Mercury Mars Saturn Ketu 
Saptamsha 
Jupiter 
SiJ'l 
RAhu Moon 
Venus 
4 3 Lagna 
Jupiter Saturn 
Rahu 
2 
5 11 
8 
6 Mars 
Mercu'X 7 Ketu 
1 
12 
Sun 
10 
Moon 
9 
11 10 
Jupiter 
93 
with me but when the marriage became an agony for her, her 
parents wanted to know if her second marriage (to be seen from 
the ninth house) would be a success as the third house and the 
third lord (seventh from the ninth house) were excellent with a 
minor blemish. 
The lady doctor after obtaining a divorce in 1981 in the Rahu­
Saturn period, re-married in the same period in 1984. 
But then , she had a series of miscarriages and became panicky, 
inspite of being a doctor herelf, and the best of medical treatment 
also being available to her. 
The analysis 
Children from the second marriage should be seen from the seventh 
house and its lord. Here it is Mars, the 5th lord with Ketu the one 
planet which is the surest causative foctor in miscarriages. 
Therefore examine the horoscope from the third house, 
Sagittarius. The sixth lord Venus is aspected by Saturn. The fifth 
lord Mars is with Ketu. But here Mars is also the twelfth lord 
and being with Ketu, spiritual remedies will work well,. 
In the Saptamsha, again see it from the third house, Taurus. 
The fifth lord, Mercury is aspected by the Moon, the third lord 
of efforts and Jupiter from the ninth house. The fifth l<;!rd-from 
Taurus is blemishless but Jupiter being the eighth lord, had to 
cause abortions. But being in the ninth house demanded proper 
worship. 
Returning from V rindavan, the greatest pilgrimage centre 
associated with Lord Krishna, an idol of Bal Krishna (the child 
Krishna) was brought for the lady doctor and she was asked to 
worship it regularly. 
She had now run into her Rahu-Mercury period. Mercury 
represents Lord Vislmu who is to be worshipped with a senSe of 
surrender and, arristically. 
An explanation why it was prescribed can be seen thus: 
(a) From the Lagna Rahu- Ketu occupy the three-nine axis of 
efforts and worship. The ninth being the spiritual merit of 
this life, the lady doctor, a religious woman, had to worship 
Bal Krishna properly to have children. 
(b) Mercury is both the ninth and the twelfth lord and as 
94 
discussed in the cases in this section, the remedies prescribed 
would work best in the periods of the ninth and the twelfth 
lords. 
(c) Seen from the third house ofthe birth horoscope, Sagittarius, 
Rahu gets aspected by Mars, the fifth and the twelfth lord 
while Mercury, with the Sun, the ninth lord aspects the 
twelfth house. 
Note: Read it from Sagittarius Lagna. 
(d) In the Saptamsha, Mars again becomes the twelfth lord from 
the third house, Taurus, and aspects Rahu. 
The lady doctor worshipped Bal Krishna very properly. She is 
now the mother of two sons, the first born in Rahu-Mercury and 
the second in Rahu-Venus. 
EXAMPLE SEVEN 
Combined Case Study of a Couple 
Astrologers who study horoscopes for the purpose of tallying 
them during the time of marriage mostly overlook the promise 
of children in the charts being examined before them. There are 
hundreds of horoscopes seen by us from time to time in which 
the married couple wanted to have children but remained 
childless and either reached a stage when they could not have 
children (from the wife) ~r one of them died childless or both 
of them childless. 
Those combinations of absolute childlessness in which what­
ever the couple may do, they would never have children takes us 
into a very complex area of astrology. That can be discussed for 
technically better trained astrologers in a separate monograph. To 
discuss them here will be out of place as the methodology adopted 
here is based on the birth horoscope, the Vimshottari dasha and 
the transits of planets only, the simplest methodology. An 
astrologer must first get used to this type of analysis. Then after 
explaining some other techniques with examples, the problem of 
childlessness can be explained . 
. In tallying horoscopes the model an astrologer should follow 
for seeing the promise about the birth of children can be easily 
Mars 
lr'1~rcury 
Moon 
Venus 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Sun Rahu 
Example Seven 
Husband 
April 19, 1947 
Bal. of Saturn 
ly8ml7d . 
Ketu Lagna Jupiter 
24'00'31" 
5'33' 
15'27' 
Saturn 
Mars 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
12'49' 
l1'50' 
2'32' 
Venus 
Saturn 
Rahu 
Event: Married in July 1983 in Venus-Jupiter period. 
Rahu Lagna 
tun 
Venus 
4 
Venus 3 Lagna 
Jupiter Sun 
Jupiter 2 
Navamsha 5 11 
8 
6 
Ketu Saturn Moon 
7 
Moon Mercury Saturn 
Mars 
Ketu 
Mere. Mars 
Lagna Jupiter 
Saturn Sun 2 1 Lagna upiter 
Sun Saturn 
Ketu 12 
Saptamsha 3 9 
Rahu 6 
Venus 
Moon Mars Venus 
~ercury 
2 
Rahu 
0' 16' 
9'04' 
11' 16' 
Rahu 
1 
12 
" 
95 
' . 
10 
9 
11 10 
Rahu 
Moon 
8 
Mars 
7 
ercury 
96 
Lagna 
Moon 
Venus 
Rahu 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Mercury Mars Sun 
Example Seven 
Wife 
April 20, 1955 
Bal. of Jupiter 
3y4m 9d 
Saturn 
1'33' 
5"51' 
0"31 
Ketu 
Jupiter 
Mars 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
12'49' 
2' 13' 
28"23' 
Venus 
Saturn 
Rahu 
8 
7 
Saturn 
1'09' 
26'04' 
6°24' 
Event : Married in July 1983 in Mercury-Rahu period. 
Mars Rahu 
Mereu!) Saturn Jupiter 
Sun 
Lagna 
Venus 
Navamsha Moon 
Ketu 
Mercury Sun Saturn Lagna 5 
Venus 
Ketu 
Saptamsha 
Mars 
Rahu 
Jupiter 
Lagna 
Venus 
Moon 
97 
elaborated into a simple seven point check-list discussed in the 
begirining of section three. That is being done and shown here 
as a model. 
1. The Fifth House from the Lagna 
Husband 
The fifth house is excellent. This will form the subject matter of 
another monograph. 
Wife 
The fifth house receives the aspect of Satusn from the eighth 
house but again the aspect of Jupiter on Satusn promises removal 
of the obstruction. Here Satusn is the twelfth lord and Jupiter 
aspects the twelfth house 
2. The FUth Lord from the Lagna 
. Husband 
The fifth lord of the husband, Saturn is in the tenth house and 
receives the aspect of the sixth lord which is an obstruction. But 
it being Jupiter it also confers a divine blessing to have a child, 
after proper worship. 
Wife 
The fifth lord is in the excellent company of a benefic, an exalted 
Venus. But Venus being the eighth lord is an obstructing planet 
here. Can it be overcome? 
The Result 
The result of this analysis leads to one inevitable conclusion -
the wife's horoscope has obstacles which will have to be overcome 
to have children. 
She had series of miscarriages, numbering three or four for 
seven years after her marriage. 
3. The FUth House of the Saptamsha 
Husband 
The fifth house has Ketu with no benefic aspect of any planet. 
98 
Wife 
The fifth house is much worse with Ketu and Mars and the aspect 
of Saturn also. 
4. The Fifth Lord of the Saptamsha 
Husband 
The fifth lord from the Saptamsha is the Moon with Mars behind 
it and Rahu ahead of it. Saturn also aspects this fifth lord. 
Note: So far the horoscope of the husband was not appearing 
to be so bad. But the Saptamsha has altered the picture 
alltogether. 
Wife 
The fifth lord has gone into the eighth house and the eighth lord 
in the fifth house. 
Note: Here Saturn is with Mercury, representing lord Vishnu 
and is aspected by Jupiter. They have to worship God to have a 
child. 
5. Remedial Measure 
Husband 
In 1990 the husband was passing through Venus-Mercury period 
both aspecting the twelfth house, and Mercury is both the ninth 
and the twelfth lord of the husband. 
Wife 
The wife was passing through the period of Mercury-Jupiter. 
Mercury is aspected by the twelfth lord, Saturn while Jupiter 
aspects the twelfth house. 
The wife had done what was prescribed twice before and she 
conceived. But two or three months after her pregnancy she gave up 
the worship which she should not have done. Learning about it later, 
I had to tell her that she would get a last chance now. She would 
conceive but she must not give up the worship at alI. 
The dasha periods of the husband and the wife have been 
discussed. Now see how transits had to be helpful. 
99 
Transits 
Saturn 
Saturn was in Capricorn in 1991 aspecting the fifth lord of the 
husband, Saturn in Cancer, and .the fifth lord of the wife, the 
Moon in Pisces. 
Jupiter 
Jupiter was in Cancer till August 14, 1991 on the fifth lord of 
the husband and was aspecting the fifth lord of the wife. 
Mars 
Mars in Taurus in 1991 was having direct and retrograde motion. 
Through its retrograde motion, giving effect from Aries also, 
Mars aspected Cancer where the fifth lord of the husband is 
positioned and which is the fifth house of the wife. 
She conceived at the end of 1991 and did not give up the 
worship prescribed. 
Mars was in Leo till August 22, 1991 aspecting the fifth house 
of the husband and the fifth lord of the wife. 
The Moon 
On August 31,1991 the Moon was in Aries aspecting the Lagna 
of the husband. On September 1, 1991 the Moon entered Taurus, 
aspecting the ninth house of the wife. 
The husband and wife were asked to do Santan Gopal recitation 
as given in Harivansha Purana and which has been included in 
Kalpavriksha, a book of stotras, brought out by Bharatiya Prachya 
Evam Sanatan Vigyan Sansthan in an excellent compilation of 
stotras for astrological remedial measures and also daily worship. 
September 1, 1991 was the Janmashtami day, the birthday of 
Lord Krishna when they had a boy. They have named the child 
after Lord Krishna. 
CHAPTER NINE 
Mishaps: Miscarriages 
Predicting mishaps from the horoscopes of parents in which their 
children can get involved is not difficult; two limitations within 
which astrologers yet feel half-crippled are: the intensity of the 
disaster and its accurate timing. Till an astrologer goes into this 
properly he is bound to misjudge the intensity of the tragedy; till 
the astrologer learns superior methods of timing the event, whi,ch 
are so' many in Vedic astrology, he will have to make his 
predictions on the basis of only the Vimshottari dasha and the 
transit of planets. It is a limitation many practitioners of Vedic 
astrology may not be aware of. All experienced and old astrologers 
of India used more than one dasha system and, the transits of 
planets. 
After seeing such a mishap, should or should not an astrologer 
tell about it in clearest terms becomes a question of personal 
morality and predil~ction. In those cases in which I did forewarn 
the parents, nothing could be done to save the tragedy. It is only 
a strong malefic combination that becomes inavertible; the we,ak 
ones manifest weakly. But when is the weak one not really weak 
and when is the strong malefic combination not really disastrous 
is never easy to analyse. 
An astrologer's humiliation and 'sense of failure is at its worst 
when he fails to see a mishap that happens suddenly. How often ' 
and how many times it happens in the life of an astrologer and 
he is blamed, in India, at any rate, is one of the unhappiest 
experiences of astrologers of India. ' 
Example One 
But let us start with the case of a lady whose story the planets 
unfold. 
Ketu 
Lagna 
Jupiter 
Saturn 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Example 0 •• 
Female 
Nov. 1, 1961 
Bal. of MereUI)' 
5y7m24d 
29·54' 
15·19' 
25·34' 
Mars 
Sun 
Moon 
Rahu 
Mercury 
Venus 
Mars 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
27"24' 
29·01' 
6·19' 
23 
101 
9 
8 
1 
10 7 Mars 
Sun 4 
Moon 
Venus 
Saturn 
Rahu 
24·18' 
0·52' 
0·50' 
Event: Married in 1984 in the period ofVenus-Rahu. The mahadasha 
of Venus which started in 1974 will be over in 1994. 
Rahu Mars Ketu Venus 
Jupiter 
7 L.gn. 5 
8 4 Mercury 
Sun 
Moon Navamsha 
6 
9 .3 
Saturn Venus 12 
10 
Saturn 2 
Ketu Lagna 
Mercury 
11 1 Jupiter 
Rahu Sun Moon 
Mars Moon 
9 
8 
Ketu Saturn 
Saptamsh. Jupiter Lagna 
Sun Rahu 
Venus 
Mercury 
Mars 1 7 
4 
Saturn 6 
2 ercury 
3 ~ 
Moon uptter 
Rahu Venus 
/// 
102 
What is the promise of this woman to have children? Let us 
take up the seven point check-list in chapter eight, apply and then 
add some more points. 
1. From the Lagna, the fifth house has the aspect of Mars which 
for Capricorn is not a yogakaraka, though Mars is not hostile 
in such a situation. 
2. The fifth lord from the Lagna, Venus is debilitated but with 
. his friend, Mercury in his sign of exaltation. This leads to the 
annulment of debilitation. 
3. The fifth house from the Saptamsha Lagna is without the 
aspect of any planet. 
4. The fifth lord from the Saptamsha Lagna is in the worst 
possible position, in the eighth house with the third and 
twelfth lord, Jupiter, and Rahu, which in classical astrology 
represents, the serpent. The eighth house is the house of 
curses. 
5. The child-giving planets here are Venus, Mercury, Jupiter 
and Mars in the birth horoscope; in the Saptamsha, Venus, 
Jupiter, Rahu, Mercury and Saturn in the seventh house 
aspecting the Lagna and the Sun, the eighth lord in the Lagna. 
6. She was married when her V enus-Rahu period was coming 
to an end. The next three successive antardashas were of 
Jupiter, Saturn and Mercury. All these three antardashas saw 
her conceive, deliver two dead babies and suffer two 
miscarriages. 
7. Tran sits of Saturn from Scorpio and Sagittarius aspected her 
fifth house and the fifth lord, while Jupiter, moving faster 
covered the child producing houses and planets repeatedly. 
She has developed a deep neurosis. From the orthodox semi-
rural background of hers, the belief held firmly by her is, that it 
is a misfortune not to have a child in nine years (in 1993) of her 
married life. The verbal taunts of the women of her village who 
blame her for not producing a child, have added to her misery. 
She does not go back to her village to meet even her parents. No 
doctor is able to cure. 
103 
Now notice the special weakness in this horoscope. 
(a) The fifth lord, Venus well placed in the ninth house with 
Mercury and aspected by Jupiter was not a hindrance to her 
conceiving. Her children did not survive. 
(b) Three debilitated planets, the Sun, Venus, and Jupiter have 
given her neither mental resistance nor physical endurance 
now. She faints and has to be hospitalised frequently. 
(c) The natural putra-karaka, (child-giver) Jupiter is not merely 
debilitated but has double malefic influence for the purpose 
of progeny. The association of Saturn and aspect of Mars has 
reduced Jupiter's protective beneficence. Jupiter fulfils the 
promise of giving children, but is unable to protect them, 
long enough even in the womb of this woman. 
(d) A glance at the Navamsha offers no relief. The eighth lord 
Mars aspects both the fifth house and the fifth lord. 
(e) From the seventh house, Mars is the fifth lord again aspected 
by Saturn, here the eighth lord as well. 
Special Technique 
In the case of women add up the longitudes of the Moon Mars 
and Jupiter and call it K.S. or Khestra Sphuta, which represents 
the point of fertility in a woman. The calculation here is as 
follows: 
(a) 
The Moon 
Mars 
Jupiter 
Signs 
3 
6 
9 
Degrees 
25 
27 
6 
Minutes 
34 
24 
19 
K.S. = 18 sign 58 degrees 77 minutes 
or Scorpio 29°17' 
(b) In Navamsha it goes into Pisces. 
(c) In the Saptamsha it remains in Scorpio. 
K.S. is all right with only a mild affliction from Saturn in the 
Navamsha and from Mars in the Saptamsha. This woman had 
104 
never any difficulty in conceiving. But other malefic combinations 
have prevented the birth of a living healthy baby. In the Moon­
Jupiter period only will there be some relief available. Jupiter as 
the twelfth lord and Moon aspecting the twelfth lord in the birth 
horoscope will force her into spiritual remedial measures which 
alone can give to her Jupiter, the will to protect her children. 
Example Two 
Here not only was the birth time doubtful but there was a debate 
among astrologers as to his correct lagna. A Bombay astrologer, 
late Prof. Thomas, a Muslim (yes, he was a Muslim who took up 
a Christian name) who took to astrology and became a successful 
professional astrologer with many good predictions to his credit, 
insisted that the lagna had to be Aquarius. 
Now will the Lagna be Aquarius if the following facts are 
known? 
1. He was a freedom fighter and had taken to some violent 
activities in the early twenties, against the then British 
government. 
2. He was married early in his childhood as was the custom then 
but could not meet his wife as he had to remain underground. 
Sometime after 1934 he could lead the normal life of a married 
man and had a son in 1937. If he had a son in 1937 the dasha 
balance of the Moon of about 2 years would give Jupiter­
Venus and so the Lagna could be Capricorn. 
3. More important he never had any money of his own. Could 
he have so many planets in the eleventh and live like a pauper? 
Then we learnt that Prof Thomas was doing western astrology 
and he went mostly by transits and not dashas. Taking the birth 
time as 8 a.m. which Shri U.S.D. said was nearly correct, the 
degrees of planets, with the balance of the dasha would be 
approximate and good enough for use. 
On this basis predictions were made that since Ketu was in the 
sixth house and in Ketu-Venus and again in Ketu-Jupiter he could 
be in high positions far away from Delhi. He went as the governor 
of two different states in two spells. There was no reason to 
change the Lagna. 
Ketu 
Example Two 
Shri U.S.D. 
Jan. 12, 1901 
Birth between 
Lagna 7 .nd 8 a.m. Mars 
Lucknow 
Venus 
~. Sat. Rahu Moon ercury 
Sun 
Lagn. 
Sun 29' 
Moon 26'30' or 26'40' or 19'45' 
Ketu2 
Mars 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
3 
20'01' 
24'01' 
6'12' 
Lagna 
10 
1 7 
4 
Venus 
Saturn 
Rahu 
105 
3' 
16'41' 
6"43' 
If the Moon is 19'45' then the Bahince of Moon will be 2 years and some 
months. Approximately Ketu mahadasha starts from 1980 middle of 
January or early February. 
Ketu Venus Lagna 
Jupiter 
Navamsha 
• 
Sun Mercury Mars 
Saturn Mercury 
. Saptamsha 
Jupiter 
Ketu 
Mars Lagna 
Venus 
Moon 
? 
Moon 
? 
Rahu 
Saturn 
Rahu 
Sun 
Moon 
6 
Rahu 
Saturn 
9 Moon 
6 Ketu 8 
Mars 
Venu 
Lagn. 5 
7 
Jupiter 10 4 
1 
3 R•hu 
2 Sun 
Mercury 
106 
What else? The usual question was put. Since his only son's 
horoscope was not available, I treated Taurus as the lagna of his 
son, and found all planets in the eighth house except the Moon 
Saturn 
Sun Ketu 
~ercury(R -
Lagna 
Jupiter l'xarnple 1lhree 
Venus Female 
6/7 April 1939 5 
Mars Moon 
Rahu 
3 4 
Lagna 27"47' Mars 16"02' Venus 
Sun 23"14' Mercury (R) 16"56' Saturn 
Moon 28"49' Jupiter 29"31' Rahu 
Ketu-Saturn from August 1, 1985 to September 10, 1986. 
Saturn 
Venus 
Rahu 
Navamsha 
Sun 
Mercury 
Saturn Moon 
Mars Venus 
Sun 
Saptamsha 
Rahu 
La~na 
~Iter 
oon 
Mars 
Ketu 
Ketu 
Lagn. 
4 Lagna 
Jupiter 
Moon 
Lagna 
Jupiter 
5 
8 2 
11 
7 
Moon 
6 Rahu 
14"48' 
27"24' 
16"39' 
2 1 
1 Jupiter Sun Moon 
Mercury 
12 :Venus 
Saturn 
Mars 
107 
and Mars. Then in Kern-Mercury it could be bad for his son. 
Why? The sixth house is the second from the fifth house and that 
is a maraka for his son. But sucha prediction could not be given. 
"Not good for the son", was the vague reading. 
On January 13, 1987 his son collapsed in the bathroom of a 
running train and died. 
Now retrospectively fix the Navamsha Lagna as Taurus and the 
Saptamsha as Libra and do the reading, all over again. His son 
had to meet such an end. This was of course a post-mortem. 
Example Three 
Her son died in a car accident on February 9, 1986. 
Could we have predicted it? No would be the answer on the 
basis of the data available except that it was not a good time for 
his son. Working harder and employing the Ashtakavarga and 
Jaimini system of astrology, it could have been predicted easily. 
Which astrologer in the world will sit down to do all this on 
every horoscope to predict? 
And what happens even if it is predicted? ! 
Example Four 
He is my friend, a journalist in the famous Hindi daily, the 
Hindustan. He was running the period of Rahu-Mars from 
August 24,1990 to September 12,1991. He was told to be careful 
about his children. But what could he have done. A daughter of 
his died of cancer on January 25, 1991. 
This event was seen in three other ways also. A warning was 
given. But could he have done any thing? Fate is fate. 
Saturn Lagna 
Jupiter Mercury Venus 
Ketu 
Jupiter 
Saturn 
3 2 Lagna 12 11 
Venus Mercury Moon 
Moon 
Example Four 
Saptamsha Sun 
Mars 
Rahu 
Ketu 
1 
4 10 
5 7 
Sun Rahu 
Mars 9 6 8 
CHAPTER TEN 
Planets and Dr. B.V. Raman's 
Children 
One fully worked out example using the Saptamsha with the 
Birth-Horoscope has been reproduced here which appeared in 
The Astrological Magazine (August 1993) in my article Astro­
Biographical Sketch of Dr. B. v: Raman-IV: It should be noted here 
that though I have been discussing Dr. Raman's horoscope, I have 
used Chitra Paksha Ayanamsha (Lahiri) and not Dr. Raman's 
which would have given me wrong Saptamsha. 
It is the Chitra Paksha Ayanamsha only which has given me 
correct results in my experiments with other divisional horo­
scopes. The remarks made about Michel Gauquelin by me have 
been supported by Dr. Raman in the footnote given below the 
article. 
From the examples given in the book showing the use of 
Saptamsha, it must have become clear that to make predictions 
about children without considering the Saptamsha can not merely 
be very disastrous but also very ludicrous. Two persons born with 
the same position of planets and the same Lagna on the same day 
can have different types of children or in case some can even be 
childless. 
The case of childlessness is not being dealt with in this book 
as a full scale research is on by a team of astrologers. In the 
research done so far 80 percent results have been obtained already 
but we do not want to take any chances by leaving a margin of 
even 20 percent error in a sensitive research like this. 
About the sex of the children we have already achieved 80 
percent results but till we reach a higher percentage, 90 or above, 
we do not propose to publish it. 
• • • 
109 
I may appear to be a harsh and unrelenting critic of whatever 
efforts have been made in the west through their system of 
astrology to prove that in astrology there are reproducible results 
(the law of replication), dependable in some areas of human 
activity than in any other branch of physical sciences. 
Michel Gauquelin .did make a valiant but feeble case for what 
is being described as "revolutionary new theory connecting 
personalities and careers with planetary positions?" - Jupiterean 
traits in scientists and sportsmen: Saturnine in scientists and 
doctors; Martian in soldiers and sportsmen; Lunar in poets; 
Venusian in actors etc. but such poor research that no prediction 
could be made on this basis and no career-pattern could be 
delineated with any degree of success or confidence. 
Scientific astrology, on the other hand, is on these lines : 
(a) The owner of a particular house for a particular prediction, 
for instance, the 5th house and the 5th lord for children. 
(b) Together with the natural significator, in this case, Jupiter, 
too will have to be examined. 
(c) We have in Hindu astrology what is known as Beeja Sphuta 
and Kshetra Sphuta also to examine the possibility of child­
births. 
(d) We then have divisional horoscopes. The Saptamsha, one­
seventh division of a horoscope for children. 
(e) We have the most important method of timing through 
dash. systems. Here only the Vimshottari dasha syste~ will 
be discussed. . 
(f) Finally we have the transits, particularly of Saturn and 
Jupiter. 
Inter-connected Scheme 
To prove that astrology has very scientific rules and show how 
the law of replication works, let me take up the horoscope of 
Dr. B. V. Raman, the greatest exponent of Hindu astrology in this 
century, and the topmost astrologer of the world. In doing this, 
I am applying findings of my own research detailed in my serial 
article Three Stages of a Prediction (The Astrological Magazine, 
110 
1985) and am also applying the well-known principles coming 
down to us from ancient times, which Dr. Raman has discussed 
brilliantly in How to Judge a Horoscope, under the 5th house. 
Parameters 
The parameters to be applied are : 
(a) See the Lagna and the Saptamsha chart and mark the 5th 
house and the 5th lord in the birth horoscope and planetary 
associations with them. 
See the 1st house and association with the lord of the 1st 
house in Saptamsha, the 5th house, and their lords and 
planetary associations with them. 
(b) After marriage, see the Vimshottari dasha scheme together 
with the antardashas involving the factors mentioned in (a) 
above. 
(c) Then examine the transits of planets, particularly Jupiter, 
Saturn, Mars and Moon, to clinch the prediction. 
Birth Horoscope and Saptamsha of Dr. Raman 
The first child (a son) was born on November 2, 1935 in Rahu­
Moon. The axis of Rahu-Ketu in Saptamsha is 5-11 and the 
Moon is in Lagna. 
The second child (a daughter) was born on August 16, 1937. It 
was the period of Jupiter-Jupiter both of which are in the 
Saptamsha 5th house. 
The third child (a son) was born on May 25, 1940 inJupiter­
Saturn. Jupiter is in the 5th house in Saptamsha as already 
discussed but Saturn is not directly connected with any of the 
factors mentioned except being in the 10th house aspecting the 
4th house, indicating the arrival of a child. 
The fourth child (a son) was born on August 3, 1942 in Jupiter­
Mercury. The position of Jupiter in Saptamsha will be seen as 
repeating throughout, it being a period of sixteen years. Mercury 
is the 5th lord of the birth horoscope, a qualified child-giver. 
The fifth child (a son) was born in Jupiter-Mercury or Ketu 
antardasha in January 1944. In the Saptamsha Ketu is in the 5th 
house while Jupiter and Mercury's roles have already been 
discussed. 
Rahu Saturn 
Moon 
Lagna Dr. B.Y. Raman 
Birth 
Horoscope 
Jupiter 
Lagna 
Moon 
Rahu 
Saptamsha 
Saturn 
Mars Mercwy 
Sun 
Mars 
Mercury 
Venus 
Ketu 
Sun 
Jupiter 
Venus 
Ketu 
Rahu 
3 4 
Sun 
Jupiter 
7 
6 
Ketu 
111 
The sixth child (a son) was born on September 29, 1946 in 
Jupiter-Venus. Venus is posited in the 5th house in Saptamsha. 
The seventh child (a daughter) was born on October 24, 1949 
in Jupiter-Moon. Jupiter is in the 5th house of the Saptamsha 
while Moon is in Saptamsha Lagna. 
The eighth child (a son) was born on September 22, 1951 in 
Jupiter-Rahu and both are connected with the 5th house of the 
Saptamsha. 
The ninth and the last child was born on December 4,1953 in 
Jupiter-Rahu again. 
Here, if any where in astrology, is a scientific method of 
proving the working of the rule of replication. I can prove it to 
be working by applying different dashas also but my purpose if 
pointing it out here is to emphasis what Dr. Raman has done so often 
- western astrologers must do Hindu astrology to be able to do 
112 
astrology in a real and true sense, scientifically as they never had and 
will never have anything like the dasha-systems of the Hindus. 
Tragic Death of a Great Son 
Even the tragic death of a great son of Dr. Raman, late 
Suryaprakash who might have excelled his father as a world-class. 
astrologer is also clear through the dasha system. Suryaprakash 
died in Saturn-Sun period. The antardasha lord Sun is the 5th 
lord of Saptamsha in the 3rd house aspected by Mars who in this 
case is also the 8th lord, showing a tragedy to a child. See it 
further in the birth horoscope in which Saturn aspects Sun in the 
6th house. 
Transit of Planets 
I have proved in my research studies that without the blessings 
of Saturn and Jupiter no child can be born. The rules discussed 
in my Three Stages of Predictions are : 
(a) Saturn and Jupiter 
Within nine months of the birth of the child Saturn and 
Jupiter should have aspected : 
1. the 5th house andlor the 5th lord or 
2. the 9th house andlor the 9th lord in 
3. direct motion or 
4. in retrograde motion in which case aspects should be 
taken from the house previous to the house also where 
Saturn and Jupiter happen to be positioned. 
Michel Gauquelin 
1 
had no advantage of either studying Hindu 
astrology or even if he tried, he found it too tough to understand 
and apply it. 
See how it works in Hindu astrology, to the same data of the 
children of Dr. Raman. 
1. We shared the same platform once in 1970 at Cambridge (England) and agrun 
in 1971 at New York and told him that without knowing Hindu astrology 
his researches will be of no consequence. But his conception of astrology was 
only the Western system - Dr. B.V. Raman 
113 
The first son was born when Saturn from Aquarius was 
aspecting Dr. Raman's 5th lord Mercury in Leo and Jupiter, was 
in Libra, the 9th house. 
The second child was born with Saturn in Aquarius till February 
1937 (till six months before the birth of the daughter) aspecting 
Mercury, his 5th lord and Jupiter was in Sagittarius aspecting the 
5th house and the 5th lord. . 
The third child was born with Saturn in Aries aspecting the 5th 
house and Jupiter till April 1940 was in Aries aspecting Mercury, 
the 5th lord. 
The fourth child was born with Saturn, retrograde in Taurus, 
aspecting Gemini from Aries (being retrograde acts from the 
previous house also) and Jupiter was in Gemini in the 5th house. 
The fifth child was born with Saturn, retrograde in Taurus 
(apply the special rule) aspeeting the 5th house and Jupiter was 
in Leo on the 5th lord. 
The sixth child was born with Saturn in Gemini in the 5th house 
and Jupiter, retrograde in Virgo (apply the special rule to 
retrograde planets and treat Jupiter as being in Leo as well) 
aspecting the 5th lord Mercury. 
The seventh child was born when Saturn was in Leo on the 5th 
lord and Jupiter till September 1949 (three months before the 
birth of the child) was i" Sagittarius aspecting the 5th lord in Leo. 
The eighth child with Saturn retrograde (special rule) in Virgo 
on the 5ih lord and Jupiter was in Aquarius till March (six months 
before the birth of the child) in Aquarius. 
The ninth child with Saturn in Libra in the 9th house and 
Jupiter in Gemini in the 5th house. 
Apply the same rules to the Saptamsha of Dr. Raman and the 
results are confirmed. Hindu astrology is so scientific in its 
application of the law of replication! 
Apply the same rules to the birth horoscope of Mrs. Raman 
and her Saptamsha and you get hundred percent results. 
(b) Mars and the Moon 
1. Apply the same rules as given here but for a period of only 
forty-five days (not for nine months as done in the case 
of Saturn and Jupiter) in direct and retrograde motion for 
114 
Mars and to horoscopes of both the parents and you again 
get hundred percent results. 
2. Apply the same rules for the Moon but for a period of 
three days and you agaiIl; get hundred percent results. 
Take the birth horoscopes and Saptamshas of both 
parents. The result is again hundred percent. 
How the Rule of Replication Works 
We have taken up in this case to prove how the law of replication 
works so accurately in Hindu astrology. The results are : 
(a) The Dasha applies to all 9 cases. 
(b) The antardasha applies to 8 out of 9 cases. 
(c) The transit of Saturn applies to all the 9 cases. 
(d) The transit of Jupiter applies to all the 9 cases. 
(e) The transit of Mars applies to all the 9 cases. 
(f) The transit of Moon applies to all the 9 cases. 
I have refrained from showing how these rules of replication 
work in many more ways, only to avoid the paper becoming 
lengthy. 
The purpose of doing it is to prove how correctly Dr. Raman 
advised western astrologers to take up Hindu astrology. After all 
it is the western astrologers who have to battle it out with their 
cynical scientists, blind to such facts which they do not care to 
know and ignorant of such a brilliant super-science as astrology. 
In the case of the children of Dr. Raman I have applied only 
one simple test to show how it replicates and the results are: 
Out of 56 applications of these rules it comes out accurate in 
55 cases! 
SECTION FOUR , 
Child-Birth: Some Other Aspects 
t1jq)J~t:c;q)JPtt:c;'l'''~~6J ~ q;tl~ii~Jq)JqJGq): J 
'l Q '1 J ij)'J q q): 'Ii '{\jj J ~ (>1" ~ ~ J (>1' n q JclCf): . tIT\! 'li wR::T J I 
Dhenukorishtakonishtakriddheshiha keshiha 
kansahridvamshikovadakah, Putnakopakah 
surajakhelano balgopalkoh patu mam sarvada. 
SHANKARACHARYA 
The child Gopal (who frolics on the banks 0/ the Jamuna, is the 
destroyer 0/ the two devils Dhenuka and Arishta, 0/ enemies; is the 
killer 0/ Kamsa and Keshi, and who expressed his anger with Putna), 
I pray, should protect me always. 
A separate book will be brought out on the methods of counting 
the number of children one can have and also their sex. The 
progress made so far has been vel}' good but it needs more 
statistical checking. 
Some other aspects being dealt with in this section are : 
Ca) Blessings assuring birth of children; 
. Cb) Codal meanings of the terms used in the Saptamsha by 
Parashara. 
- Cc) Twenty categories of children referred to in the Mahabharata 
and twelve types of children generally referred to. 
Cd) Problem of childlessness. 
CHAPTER ELEVEN 
Blessings Assuring the 
Birth of Children 
Among all the tested combinations for blessings of planets 
assuring children, the combinations given in the Sarvarth 
Chintamani, a great astrological classic, seem to have worked best. 
It is the experience of majority of astrologers. The eleven 
combinations given here are from the Sarvarth Chintamani. 
1. If the fIfth house is aspected by benefics and the fifth lord 
is aspected by benefics, it assures the birth of children. 
2. If the fifth house, the fifth lord or Jupiter receive benefic 
aspects, it assures the birth of children. 
3. If the Lagna lord be strong and be in the fifth house and 
Jupiter also be strong, it assures the birth of children. 
4. If Jupiter be the fifth lord and be strong or; 
5. If Jupiter as the fifth lord be aspected by s.trong Lagna lord, 
it assures the birth of children. 
6. If Jupiter and the fifth lord be in Vaisheshikamsha (in ten 
benefic divisions in the divisional horoscopes) the birth of 
children is assured. 
7. If the Lagna lord and the fifth lord be together or if they 
aspect each other or if they have exchanged places, it assures 
the birth of children. 
8. If the Lagna lord and the fifth lord be in quadrant and the 
second lord be strong, there will be birth of children. 
9. Find out the Navamsha lord of the fifth lord of the birth 
horoscope. If that planet is in a good condition or well-
117 
aspected in the birth horoscope, the birth of children is 
assured. 
10. Ifboth the Lagna and the ninth lords be in the seventh house 
and the second lord be in the Lagna, the birth of children 
is assured. 
11. Find out the Navamsha lord of the seventh lord. If that 
planet is aspected by the Lagna, ninth or the second lord, 
the birth of children is assured. 
CHAPTER TWELVE 
Interpretation of the Codal Names' 
of the Lords of the Saptamsha Divisions 
In Vedic Astrology the divisional charts are as important as the 
birth chart through which the nature, character and behavior of 
a person and his attitude towards life are also studied along with 
future events. Each of the sixteen divisional charts reveals some 
important aspect of life and Saptamsha stands for the lineage -
the sons and the grandchildren. Here an attempt is made to 
analyse the specific importance of the Saptamsha on the basis of 
the codal names attributed to each of th~ seven divisions. The 
exoteric and esoteric meanings of these lords are studied under 
three different categories. Some are purely exoteric, some ' have 
both exoteric and esoteric meanings combined and some are 
purely esoteric in nature. 
Category - I 
According to Hindu Philosophy the nature of a person depends 
upon the existence of the three qualities (gunas) - sattva, rajas 
and tamas - in exuberance or in exiguous quality. Shrimad 
Bhagvad Gita has devoted one full chapter to distinguish and 
analyse the nature and personalities of human beings on the basis 
of these three gunal In the Bhagavata Purana, while describing 
the path of devotion (bhakti yoga) to Devahuti, sage Kapila 
describes in a nutshell how the devotees differ according to the 
three qualities (gunas). Here Sattvika is considered as the highest 
form of worship where the devotee carries out all action& for the 
1. The interpretation is based on the following three dictionaries -
Shahdakalpadrum (SKD) in five volumes; A S anskrit English Dictionary, 
Monier Williams (MW) ; Sanskrit English Dictionary, V.S. Apte (VSA). 
2. Srimad Bhagvad Gita, Chapter 14. 
119 
sake of others'. Service to humanity is considered as the highest 
form of worship. 
Thus when we analyse the character and nature of a person the 
qualities (gunas) have an important role to play in the interpre­
tation of a chart. The planets are grouped into three on the basis 
of these qualities. This type of interpretation reflects on the 
exoteric side of the personality. 
Category - II 
The second type of interpretation is based on four different planes 
- the physical, the mental and psychic, the intellectual and the 
spiritual. Accordingly, the planets influerice the person in these 
four different planes. The planes can thus be categorised as 
follows: . 
1. Physical plane Mars, Venus, Sun, Saturn 
2. Mental and Psychic plane - Moon, Rahu 
3. Intellectual plane Mercury, Venus, Jupiter 
4. Spiritual plane Saturn, Rahu, Ketu, Jupiter 
The mental faculty have four different stages such as (1) cogni­
tion (2) understanding (3) knowledge (4) analysis which corres­
ponds to the above mentioned four categories. Thus the Sanskrit 
texts have divided the mind (manas) into four parts called antaha­
karana chatushtayam (the four fold mind) such as manas, buddhi, 
ahamkara and chitta 4. The interpretation based on this would 
reveal the exact attitude of the native and his approach to life. 
Category - III 
The ' Saptam sha can also be interpreted purely from the esoteric 
angle. Many scholars, ancient and modern are of the opinion that 
the seven divisions of the Saptamsha denote the gradual, slow bur 
steady development of an individual on the spiritual path from 
the physical and mundane to the spiritual plane. The meanings 
of the 'words used for the lords of the seven divisions are -
3. Shrimad Bhagvata Purana, Skandha 3, Adhyaya 29, Shloka 10. 
4. For further clarification of these words refer Monier Williams (MW), p. 124. 
120 
(1) kshara (alkaline, pungent), (2) kshira (milk or water), (3) dadhi 
(the curd), (4) ajya (clarified butter), (5) ikshu (sugarcane), 
(6) madya (the intoxicating liquid) and (7) shuddhajal (pure water) 
- indicate the possibility of these connections with the different 
stages of the Kunda/ini yoga where the Kunda/ini shakti (serpent 
power) is aroused through the six centres step by step and stage 
by stage from its slumber state to the pure conscious and blissful 
state. 
These six centres cannot be found in the physical body though 
they are connected with the particular nerve centres. The six 
centres known as (1) Muladhara, (2) Svadhishthana, (3) Manipura, 
(4) Anahata, (5) Vishuddhi and (6) Aajya are the divine subtle 
centres of the corresponding physical and psychic sheaths. The 
last division Sahasrara is the final stage. These are the six subtle 
centres where the various forms of the Supreme Power (Maya 
Shaktz) are expressions of pure consciousness. These can be 
connected with the gross bodily parts visible to the eyes as 
plexuses though they are not to be found in the physical body. 
They are connected on the physiological side with the central 
spinal system comprising the brain or encephalon contained 
within the skull and the spiral cord. Particular form of energy of 
kundali resides at particular chakras and all such energies exist in 
a magnified form in the sahasrara, the final stage. Thus the gross 
and subtle are well connected. 
In the first stage which corresponds to kshara one experiences 
the sturdy, harsh and difficult path of life. The second stage kshira 
represents the happiness of the world through worship, songs etc. 
The third stage dadhi shows the steadiness in the path of 
realisation {sadhana} - an attempt to realise the Supreme. The 
fourth stage ajyam shows the fruitful stage of sadhana, attainment 
of quietude. In the fifth stage called ikshu, the person enjoys the 
experience of the powerful bliss and in the next, the sixth stage 
called madya, the bliss increases and the person gets immersed in 
the enjoyment like the intoxicated person. The final stage called 
shuddha jal reveals the ever blissful state from where there is no 
return. This is purely the outcome of the endeavour of the 
individual. Thus these stages indicate the gradual emancipation 
of the soul from the mundane and the physical to the spiritual 
121 
and from the tamasic or slumber state to sattvik, the pure 
consciousness and bliss. In the interpretation of the chart this may 
reveal the development of the individual. 
An attempt is made in this paper to interpret the Saptarosha 
on the basis of all the factors mentioned above while interpreting 
the codal names assigned to the different parts of Saptamsha. 
The Saptamsha 
In Saptamsha each sign is divided into seven equal parts of 
4'17'8.57". The counting of Saptamsha varies in odd and even 
signs. In odd signs (I, 3, 5, 7, 9 and 11) counting starts from the 
sign under consideration and the Saptamshas are governed by the 
lords of seven signs respectively commencing from the first sign; 
whereas in even sign counting starts from the seventh sign 
therefrom and the Saptamshas are governed by the lords of 
seventh and the following signs. For example if Aries is the 
Lagna, first Saptamsha will be of Aries whereas if Taurus is the 
Lagna it will be of Scorpio (7th from the sign concerned). 
Sage Parasharas has enumerated the names of the lords of seven 
divisions as kshara, kshira, dadhi, ajya, ikshu, madya and shuddha 
ja! successively where as lords of seven Saptamshas in even signs 
are in the reverse order - starting from shuddha ja! the order will 
be madya, ikshu, ajya, dadhi, kshira and kshara. 
Division Degrees . Lord of division 
( in odd sign in even sign 
I 0° to 4°17' Kshara ShuddhaJal 
II 8"34' Kshira Madya 
III 12°51' Dadhi Ikshu 
IV 1i08' Ajyam Ajyam 
V 21"25' Ikshu Dadhi 
VI 25°42' Madya Kshira 
VII 30°00' ShuddhaJal Kshara 
5. Brihal Parashtira Hora Shastra, Sixteen Vargas, Saptamsha, Chapter 6, Shloka 
10-11. 
Derivation 
1. KSHARA (afR) 
aN + Uf: 
(kshar + nah) 
1. f1l 'l\ iil'l" I 't 
(Vldlavanam) 
2. ~lffR: 
(yava ksharah) 
3. ,.,f1l~~: 
(rasavishesh) 
QUALITIES 
4. (a) <4<;G1''1«i 
(svedajanatvam) 
Saptamsha Codal Names 
Literal Meaning 
1. <a) A type of salt produced by boiling 
earth impregnated with saline 
particles. 
(b) A particular kind of salt used 
medicinally as a tonic. 
<c) Black salt prepared by fusing fossil 
salt with a small portion of Embric 
myrobalan. 
2. An a1ksli prepared from the ashes of 
burnt green barley corns. 
3. <a) A type of liquid. 
<b) Juice, water, essence, fluid. 
4. <a) produces sweat 
Implied and extended meaning 
1. <a) Procured with much difficulty, struggle, 
hard to attain something, capable of 
bringing out the best out of nothing. 
(b) Power to drive disagreeable truths 
home, biting wit, energises others. 
<c) Unattractive personality, does not 
make a show of beneficiepcy, mixes 
well with any type of person, hard like 
a coconut but sweet inside. 
2. Sarcastic, biting remarks, helpful even at 
one's own cost, one who can excite and 
stimulate others. 
3. adjustable, pliable, easily mingles with 
others, sociable. 
.... 
~ 
(b) ~. tl'r~ 
(vidahi, 
tikshnoshnatvam) 
(c) ~<'1~<'I"'1I'<'~?T­
'1'llt*l'<t 
(shulashleshma -
ruchibhrish.2, 
trishamutrakrit) 
(d) ~n'lOI«i 
(shoshanatvam) 
6. f}f;~~'I(q&1«i f}f;~ftIC\ 
(krimipumstwa­
ghnatvam krimijit) 
7. ,(<R1fC1'tl<6'<I: 
(Raktapittakarah) 
8. ~lql'(li/'l~'1I~I,('1«i 
(sharkarashmari­
nashanatvam) 
(b) heat 
(c) produces sharp or acute pain espe­
cially of colic or gout, produces 
phlegm, mucus, vehement and strong 
coition, produces thirst and urine. 
(d) dries up the body. 
5. Caustic, corrosive substance used for 
many medicinal purposes, helps in 
digestion, molasses, glan. 
6. Destroys the semen virile, kills the 
worms and gems . . 
7. Increases blood and bile. 
4. creates fear in others, hot in temper, short 
tempered, can create trouble, will be a 
great cause of worty to others, creates 
tension around him, enjoys forcible and 
vehement copulation, can indicate a person 
with tendency to rape, removes the energy. 
5. bitter, biting, outspoken without realising the 
outcome, sarcastic but no ill-fee1ing, helpful. 
6. Loss of power or strength, sterility, helpful, 
removes all obstacles, obstructs all activities. 
7. gives energy, at times creates tension and 
trouble. 
8. (a) Destroys sugar and stone (diabetes) 8. (a) cause of anxiety. 
in the bladder. >-' 
'" w 
Derivation Literal Meaning 
(b) a kind of a tree used as lithontriptic 
that breaks up stone in the bladder. 
Implied and extended meaning 
(b) removes the cause of trouble and 
source of pain, helpful and beneficial. 
Thus kshara may indicate a person who is unattractive in appearance, very outspoken, sarcastic and unassuming. He lives 
for the benefit of others and at times is the cause of worry, always helpful at his own cost. This may represents the first Chakra 
of the six centres called Muladhara where one is still immersed deeply in the world and ·the enjoyments therein. Thus it 
represents the physical plane and tamas and rajas qualities. 
2. KSHIRA(~ 
af'{ or tRl + ~ 
(kshar or ghas + iran) 
Q!JALITlES 
~ "ff'f~ ~ 
'I &I <p <"1 C1 't 
(amritam sarvabhutanam 
jivanam balakritamatam) 
4. qu",,'; (pacyamanam) 
6. 3TfT.l '(1~ '11 <"1 q; 
(agnisomatmakam) 
1. Water 
2. Milk 
3. (a) It is like ambrosia or the living 
beings 
(b) gives strength 
4. helpful in digestion 
5. helpful and beneficial if taken in proper time. 
6. in the form of fire and soma (ambrosia) 
1. Main pivot of ·the family, plain, simple. 
2. Sweet in nature, amiable. 
3. (a) who can be looked to in times of need, 
in distress and can solve all problems, 
(b) infuses spirit and strength in others 
4. one who can soothe in distress, helpful 
5. extends timely help. 
6. life SaMour, gives energy and infuses spirit 
unto others. 
7. beneficial to the body and helpful in many 7. beneficial and helpful. 
diseases. 
>-' 
~ 
8. 'I m l'1qiJ)g<R1 
a?I''t'i'lI<Ji'l <IT T1: 
~ ~ cq«'I~ 
"", .. 1!§lq ~ '1<1: 
(na shastam lavanair­
yuktam kshirascham1ena 
va punah, karoti kush­
tam tvakdosham tas­
mannaiva hitam matah) 
8. not good if mixed with salt or sour and 
creates diseases of the skin. 
8. one who changes his nature due to bad 
association, brings havoc due to association. 
This division may indicate a person who is sweet in nature, amiable, serene and one who can be looked up to in times of 
need. This may represent the second chakra called Svadhishthana where the person elevates himself from the baner qualities 
and tries to attain a happier state of mind. Though continues to be in the same physical plane the baner qualities are reduced . . 
3.DADHI~ 
lltl+~ 
(dadh + in) 
4.~ 
(vasanam) 
1. coagulated milk, thick sour milk 
(regarded as remedy) 
2. to hold, to possess, to give, to present 
3: Turpentine 
4. (a) garment 
(b) house \ 
1. Steady in nature, deep thinking, helpful 
2. possessive and preserving nature, bountiful 
3. soothing and comforting in sorrow and 
misery, pain reliever 
4. (a) acts like a shield for the subordinates 
and family 
(b) shelter, helpful 
... 
IV 
'" 
Derivation 
QYALITIES 
5. ~ (amalatvan) 
6. fFr:m<i 
(snigdhatvam) 
7.~ 
(svadutvam) 
8. x'l'il'1 iii 
(Rochanatvam) 
9. ~ (Hridayatvam) 
10. 4ijC;;qffl 
(mangalyatvam) 
11. ~ (gurutvam) 
Literal Meaning 
5. pure, spotless, clean, shining 
6. Sticky, viscous, slippery, smooth, glossy, 
resplendant, attached, friendly, soli:, mild, 
gentle 
7. Sweet, savoury, palatable, agreeable, 
charming 
8. bright, shining, radiant, pleasant, 
charming, stimulating 
9. attractive 
10. auspicious, lucky, pious, pure, 
confering happiness 
11. heavy, weighty, large, great, high in degree, 
violent, vehement, valuable, venerable 
12. qm ifl~~I'1'1('q,\ 12. which cures disease due to wind 
(vata-doshashamanatvam) 
13. q~'1~IIf."jijil~('q,\ 13. removes the heat 
(vahnishantikaritvam) 
Implied and extended meaning 
5. Pure in thought, deed, bright 
6. affectionate, mild and . tender, friendly, and 
soft in nature 
7. Attractive and charming personality, 
adjustable, amiable 
8. Agreeable, stimulant, bright 
9. one who is liked by everyone 
10. Pious, pure, confers happiness, lucky, 
who spreads auspiciousness around him 
11. Deep thinking, hard to approach, 
important personality, highly respected 
12. helping in times of distress 
13. calms down anger, sorrows and sufferings 
..... 
N 
'" 
14. 'iful~<I5'{jifj % 
<151 R til 'I 
(raktodrekashukra 
vriddhi karitvam) 
14. increases ,blood and semen, virile 14. gives energy, supporting attitude -
physical and moral 
This may refer to a sobre, helpful, attractive and pleasing personality who can act as a covering shield for others in danger 
and one who stimulates and energises others. 
With reference to esoteric interpretation this may correspond with the Svadhishthana chakra which represents the steady status, 
when the multidimensional mental activities are under control and is well advanced in the path of realisation. Still the person 
is not bereft of tomasik qualities. 
4.AJYAM(~) 
3ll + 3l3'J! + <mq 
(a + anj + kyap) 
'l1'1fil>'l1 wwt 
~ 
(yagakriya sadhanam taila 
dugdhadikam) 
1: melted or clarified butter for pouring 
into the holy fire at the sacrifice, any 
other material like oil, milk etc. which 
are offered in fire 
2. Name of a chant connected with 
morning sacrifice 
3. devata (deity) 
1. Religious, predominance of sattYa gunas, 
sacrificing and aspiring for the attainment 
of virtue (punya) and elevation from this 
material world 
2. very auspicious 
3. High social status, respected and honoured 
by others, helpful. 
Ajyam may refer to a righteous native, pure and good, enjoying great honour, respect and a high position. This may correspond 
to the Anahata chakra where the mental attitude forms into quietude due to continuous sadhana. .... 
IV 
" 
Derivation 
5. IKHSU ~1lJ) 
~+~ 
(is + kasu) 
6. ~: (gudatrnah) 
QUALITIES 
7. 'i!1'1R1tl'lI~Ic<i 
(raktapitta nasitvam) 
8. ~ (madhuratvam) 
9. ~ (gurutvam) 
10.~ftd&lc<i (shitalatvam) 
11. 1:" '11% 1m R c<i 
(mutrashuddhikaritvam) 
Literal Meaning Implied and extended meaning 
1. sugarcane 1. rough appearance sweet and amiable 
2. stem of a sugarcane temperament, helps and comforts others 
3. to desire, to select, to obtain 3. selective, hard working, compromising 
4. eyelash 4. helps others effortlessly, guards others secrets 
5. name of a king 5. having authority, high position in society 
6. Sugarcane, out of which jaggety is made 6. sweet and unassuming personality, ready to 
undergo any difficulty to help others. 
7. Which can remove 'bile blood' - (a 7. helps in sudden danger 
particular disturbance of blood caused 
by bile, plethora spontaneous hemor-
rhage from the mouth or nose 
8. sweet after boiling 8. sweet natured 
9. heavy, respectable 9. strong personality, highly honoured 
10. cooling 10. cools down the anger, comforts others 
11. cleans the urine 11. helpful, removes the difficulties of others 
... tv 
00 
12.8ic;)qi'1'l'1«i 12. removes the diseases 12. beneficial, helps in times of need 
(tridosa samanatvam) 
13.4<1i1i1~«i (balakaritvam) 13. gives strength 13. gives moral and physical support 
14. iii I RiG I\!o:i (kancidatrtvam) 14. gives splendour 14. brings good name to the family 
This division may refer to a non-assuming rough personality who helps others effortlessly and enjoys name, fame and position. 
Hence the prepondence of satlv ik gunas is seen. Where one lives for the benefit of others. This corresponds to Vtshuddhi chakra 
where one awakens the Supreme energy and enjoys that bliss. 
6. MADYA (If\lI) 
"lq (mad) 
'l'1 (mam) 
1. to rejoice, to be glad, delight, to enjoy 
heavenly bliss, to intoxicate, to exhila­
rate, to inspire 
2. (a) intoxicating 
(b) gladdening 
(c) exhilarating 
(e) wine, any intoxicating drink 
(e) lovely 
1. who keeps himself happy always, who 
imparts happiness to others, enthuses 
energy in others 
2. (a) gives energy to others 
(b) keeps everyone happy 
(c) pleasing personality 
(d) gives energy to others 
(e) pleasing personality 
Thi s may refer to a self contented, pleasing and attractive personality who always keeps himself happy and makes others happy. 
In this state the native is unaffected by joys and sorrows, 1<!l "'11il ''1'1'1 I ~ fll'I","W dukheshvanud vigna mana sukheshu 
vigatasprihah - the state of a rthitaprajna (steadfast in mind) as propounded in Bhagvad Gila. This state refers to the spiritual .... 
plane where only bliss is experienced and corresponds to Ajna chakra !i 
\ 
Derivation 
7. SUDDHAJAL (:g<aGI(i'l) 
'W!+<Kj 
(suddh + kta) suddha 
3. ~ "ljq<lI<1 
Galati jivayati) 
4. ~ = G'-l"fc! 
Galati - accha dayati) 
Literal Meaning 
1. cleansed, pure, clear, bright, acquitted, 
white, free from error, faultless, accu­
rate, genuine, true, tried, examined, 
authorised, approved 
2. name of Shiva, name of one of the 
sages of seven Manu 
3. one who gives life 
4. to cover, to hide or screen, encircle 
entangle. 
Implied and extended meaning 
1. pure in words thought and deed, bereft of 
any fault, one who has realised the futility 
of worldly possessions 
2. having authority, pleasing personality, 
respected by others 
3. gives life to others, helpful, influencial, 
protector 
4. not easily accessible, offers protection to 
the people around him 
This may refer to a very influential, spiritually uplifted, unsocial silent observer. Uplifts others without revealing his personality. 
This state corresponds to that of Sahasrara, the last stage where one remains calm and serene having reached the highest state 
of mental equilibrium. 
Thus we find a gradual but slow development of the personality and character of a person from the first state of purely 
materialistic attitude, attached to the world with all baner qualities till he reaches the final bliss of Pure Consciousness. 
>-' v.> 
o 
Table in a nutshell of the Saptamsha Codal names 
leading to the probable interpretation 
1. Kshara (alkaline) tamas more + rajas less purely physical M uladhar chakra 
am- WTItTR 
2. Kshira (milk) tamas + rajas (almost equal) physical, mental and phychic Svadhishthan 
ajR ~ 
3. Dadhi (curd) tamas less + rajas more physical less + more of mental Manipura 
<:fu" + intellectual ~ 
4. Ajyam (purified butter) least of tamas + rajas + sattva mental + intellectual Anahata 
~ 3T"ffirn 
5. Ikshu (sugarcane) rajas + sattva intellectual and spiritual Vishuddhi 
~§ ~ 
6. Madya less of rajas + more of sattva more of spiritual Aajya 
"IR! anwr 
7. Shuddhajal pure sattva pure spiritual Sahasrara 
'Q<il "1 <>I ~ .... w .... 
CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
Categories of Children 
The ancient thinking about the types of children, a woman can 
have, has always been both liberal and progressive. It is only now 
when the western societies have started legalising children born 
out of wedlock or accepting them in the society without any 
stigma attached to them that once again the attention of many 
Indians have been drawn to the problem of what are called 
illegitimate children. A famous Indian journalist, who had earned 
a high reputation both for his sense of style in English and 
relatively higher moral standards in the disturbed post-indepen­
dence era of Indian journalism, was the late S. Mulgaonkar. All 
his life, he had one big remorse - that he was an illegitimate son 
and he did not know who his father was. Perhaps in the Victorian 
England, the expression bar-sinister conveyed social rejection of 
a child born out of wedlock. What happens in modern India is 
no different. We have a long list of children abandoned in the 
hospitals and maternity-homes. 
Ancient India was much more progressive in these matters and 
not merely recognised the problem but adopted a very sympa­
thetic attitude towards such children. In the Shanti Parva of the 
Mahabharata, Bhishma explains to Yudhishthira that there could 
be as many as twenty types of sons. Out of these twenty, six are 
from the Pratiloma marriages (marriage below one's status in the 
caste-hierarchy), six from Anuloma marriages (in which the status 
of the husband is higher than that of the wife). 
Apart from these twelve, the normal eight types of children 
recognised have been : 
1. Anantrajah or aurasa which is the categorisation of the child 
133 
born from a regular marriage without any element of un­
orthodoxy in it. 
2. Niruktajah: When the name of the father was not known or 
was kept concealed. 
3. Prasritijah : Perhaps this category refers to Niyoga system, 
when the wife of a man who is unable to produce a child or 
a widow wanting to have a child was allowed socially to 
become a mother. So it was known as Niyoga system. 
4. Patitasya: When a particular person fell from social grace as 
a result of some sin or vice, his children were looked down 
upon. 
5. Datta: It obviously refers to adoption of children. 
6. Krita: Here, it is not clear as the meaning could be very wide 
- children through artificial means like modern test-tube 
babies or even abandoned children. 
7. Adhyudha: A girl in love with a man could have sex with him 
and conceive before marriage and deliver child after the 
marriage to the same person. 
s. Kaneena: A child born to an unmarried maid. 
All these 20 types of children recognised in the Mahdbharata 
were looked after by the society which put spiritual value far above 
the petty fogging attitude of a dogmatic and unrelenting society. 
There is this great story of Satyakama in the Chhandogya 
Upanishad. There was a maid-servant Jabala who had a son by 
the name of Satyakama. The son Satyakama had a desire to 
become a Brahmachari. He asked his mother about his ancestry. 
But the mother said that she could not tell him who exactly his 
father was, as when she had conceived him, she had been 
extremely busy with her household duties. She d!d not exactly 
know by attending to which of her guests she conceived him. 
J abala solved the problem of Satyakama by telling him that he 
could introduce himself to others as SatyakamaJabala. Satyakarna 
went to Rishi Gautama and expressed his desire to become his 
\ 
134 
disciple. And when Gautama Rishi asked him to tell him his 
ancestry, he narrated the story exactly as told by his mother. 
Gautama Rishi was so highly impressed by Satyakama that he 
straightaway agreed to initiate him as his disciple saying that 
anyone who had such deep love of and courage to speak the truth, 
and speak so candidly could only be a truly spiritual person and 
was fit to be a Brahmin. 
Rishi Gautama straightaway agreed to initiate Satyakama into 
the Brahmacharya Ashrama through spiritual initiation. 
The astrological classification of 12 types of children, both in 
Brihat Jataka of Varahamihir and the Saravali of Kalyan Varma 
is as follows : 
1. Aurasa : The legitimate son of a real father and real mother. 
2. Kshetraja : When a male is unable to have his own child he 
could take someone's help for continuation of his own family 
and such a child is known as Kshetraja. 
3. Datta: (Kritrima) : When a grown-up son of some other 
parents is adopted without their consent. 
4. Kritrima : A grown up son adopted without the consent of 
his parents. 
5. Adham Pravara : When a son of a person of low status is 
adopted. 
6. Gudhotpanna : A child born secretly of a mother when her 
legitimate husband is absent and the real father of the child 
is not known. 
7. Aapaviddah : A child abandoned by his parents and adopted 
by a stranger. 
8. Paunarbhava : A child born of second marriage of a woman. 
9. Kanina : A child of an wunarried woman. 
10. Sahoda: The child of a woman who became pregnant before 
marnage. 
11. Kritakah : A child purchased from natural parents. 
12. Dasi-prabhava : The son of a female slave. This refers to the 
135 
feudal society when the Serf and slave system existed and such 
children when born could still be accepted in the society. 
The entire story of Mahabharata revolves around children 
belonging to all these varieties. All the Pandavas and Kauravas 
come under these categories. 
Saravali gives 12 different combinations for such births. Unless 
a lot of correct astrological data is collected and these combina­
tions tested, it will not be possible for us to establish the validity 
of the combinations given in Saravali, but the fact that the 
astrological classic recognises these categories based on Hindu 
Dharma Shastra very clearly shows that the Indian society in those 
days attributed greater value to truth, spirituality and right 
conduct and not so much to the legitimacy of birth. Vidura of 
the Mahabharata is referred to as a paragon of spiritual values 
though he was actually the son of a maid-servant in Kaurava 
Darbar. Rishi Satyakama is remembered in the Upanishadic lore 
as the greatest disciple of his guru Maharshi Gautama. It is this 
love for the highest spiritual values which has never created in the 
Hindu mind any reaction about the virgin birth of Christ. On the 
other hand the Naturalist philosophers of Germany have always 
been the worst critics of many of the Biblical stories about the 
birth of Christ and his Gurudom. 
\\ 
CHAPTER FOURTEEN 
Childlessness : Astrological Causes 
~ Q,;-ilC<1'1IQ;;J <ttl i!>'l11'nscm: I 
~15I'd~'11!>1IQl mwt ~ CJ1j: II 
Dehe Panchatvamapanne Dehi Karmanugo-avashah 
Dehantara-manuprapya Praktanam Tyajate Vapuh 
SRIMAD BHAGVATAM 
There are many well-known causes for childlessness, which are 
of two types, either children are not born, or if born, they die as 
a result of the evil karmas of past life or lives. The time tested 
combinations given in the world's greatest astrological classic 
ever, the Brihad Parashara Hora Shastra are being given here in 
a tabular form for convenience. 
Factors to be Examined 
Four factors should be examined deeply to arrive at a definite 
conclusion : 
Ca) The Lagna lord should not be weak; 
Cb) The fifth lord should not be weak; 
Cc) The seventh lord should not be weak; 
Cd) Jupiter, the natural significator of children, should not be 
weak. 
Note: Anyone of these factors, even if not weak, but if heavily 
afflicted, does become a cause for unhappiness from 
children. 
If all the four factors are weak, perhaps nothing can be done. 
137 
It has been observed that if any of these four factors is combust, 
it does affect a child. 
Specific Causes for Childlessness 
Parashara gives s pecific causes for childlessness and also pre­
scribes remedies, which are as follows : 
The Curse of Snakes 
1. If Rahu is in the fifth house aspected by Mars, there is loss 
of children. 
2. If the fifth lord with Rahu and Saturn is in the fifth house 
and is aspected by or conjoined with the Moon, or 
3. If the significator of children, (Jupiter) is with Rahu the fifth 
lord is weak and the Lagna lord and Mars are conjunct, there 
will be loss of children as a result of the curse of snakes. 
Note: People, particularly the modern man, finds it difficult to 
believe in the curses of snakes. Yet an astrologer can see 
how effectively these combinations work in the death of 
children. 
Some other Combinations for Mishaps to Children 
4. If Jupiter is with Mars; the Lagna lord is with Rahu; and the 
fifth lord is ill-placed (in sixth, eighth or twelfth house). 
5. If the fifth lord falls in the Navamsha of Mars (Aries or 
Scorpio) or of Mercury (Gemini or Virgo) and the Lagna has 
Rahu and Gulika. 
6. If the fifth house is Aries (for Sagittarius) or Scorpio (Cancer 
Lagna) and if the fifth lord is with Rahu and is conjoined 
with or is aspeered by Mercury; 
7. If the fifth house has Rahu, Mars, Saturn, Mercury and 
Jupiter and the Lagna and the fifth lords are weak; 
.8. If the Lagna lord is with Rahu; the fifth lord is with Mars 
and Jupiter too is with Rahu; 
These combinations lead to the loss of children. 
138 
Father's Curses 
9. If the Sun is debilitated in the fifth house (for Mithuna 
lagna) and is in the Navamsha of Saturn (the Sun should be 
then between 10' and 16'40') and, is between malefics. 
10. If the Sun with a malefic is in a trident (trikona) between 
malefics. 
11. IfJupiter is in Leo, the fifth lord is with the Sun and there 
is a malefic in the fifth house and the Lagna; 
12. If the weak Lagna lord is in the fifth house, the fifth lord 
is with the Sun and there are malefics in the fifth house and 
the Lagna. 
13. If the fifth lord is in the tenth and the tenth lord in the fifth 
house and malefics in the Lagna and the fifth house 
14. If Mars as the tenth lord (Cancer and Aquarius Lagna) is 
with the fifth lord and the Lagna, the fifth and tenth houses 
are with malefics. 
15. If the tenth lord is ill-placed (6, 8 or 12) Jupiter is in a malefic 
house and the Lagna and the fifth lords are with malefics. 
16. If in the Lagna and the ftfth house there are the Sun, Saturn 
and Mars; Rahu and Jupiter are in eighth and the twelfth 
houses. 
17. If the Sun is in the eighth house, Saturn' in the fifth house, 
the fifth lord with Rahu and the Lagna with a malefic. 
18. If the twelfth lord is in the Lagna, the eighth lord in the fifth 
and the tenth lord in the eighth. 
19. If the sixth lord is in the fifth house, the tenth lord in the 
sixth house and Jupiter is with Rahu. 
When such combinations are present in any horoscope there will 
be loss of children or no child-births as a result of the curse of 
the father. 
Mother's Curses 
20. If the Moon as the fifth lord (applicable only to Pisces 
139 
Lagna) is debilitated (in Scorpio) or is between two malefics 
and there are malefics in the fourth and the fifth house. 
21. If Saturn is in the eleventh house, a malefic in the fourth 
house and a debilitated Moon in the fifth house (for Cancer 
Lagna only) 
22. If the fifth lord is ill-placed, the Moon is with malefics and 
the Lagna lord is debilitated. 
23. If the fifth lord is ill-placed, there are malefics in the Lagna 
and the fifth house and the Moon in the Navamsha of a 
malefic 
24. If the fifth lord is with the Moon, Saturn, Rahu and Mars 
in the fifth or the ninth house; 
25. If the fourth lord is conjoined with Saturn, Rahu and Mars 
and the Lagna and the fifth house have the Sun and the 
Moon; 
26. If the Lagna lord and the fifth lord are in the sixth house 
the fourth lord is in the eighth house and the eighth lord 
and the tenth lords are in the Lagna. 
27. If the sixth and the eighth lords are in the Lagna, the fourth 
lord is in the twelfth house and the Sun and the Moon are 
in the fifth house with a malefic. 
28. If the Lagna is between malefics, a weak Moon in the 
seventh house and Rahu in the fourth house and Saturn in 
the fifth house, in these conditions there is either no birth 
of children or loss of children, even if born. 
Additional Combinations 
29. If the fifth lord is in the eighth house and the eighth lord 
in the fifth house and the Moon and the fourth lord in the 
sixth, eighth or twelfth houses; 
30. If the Lagna is Cancer with Mars and Rahu in it and the 
Moon and Saturn be in the fifth; 
31. Ifin the Lagna, the fifth, the eighth and twelfth houses there 
be Mars, Rahu, the Sun and Saturn; the Lagna lord and the 
fourth lords be ill-placed; 
\ 
140 
32. If] upiter is in the eighth house with Rahu and Mars; the 
Moon and Saturn be in the fifth house; 
If such combinations are present, there is either loss of children 
or no birth of children as a result of the curse of the mother. 
Curses of Brother 
33. If the third lord be in the fifth house with Mars and Rahu; 
the Lagna and the eighth lord be in the eighth house; 
34. If Mars and Saturn be in the Lagna and the fIfth house; and 
third lord be in the ninth house; and Mars be in the eighth 
house; 
35. If debilitated Jupiter be in the third house (for Scorpio) 
Saturn be in the fifth house, and the Moon and Mars in the 
eighth; 
36. If the Lagna lord be in the twelfth, Mars in the fifth house 
and the fifth lord in the eighth house with a malefic; 
37. lEthe Lagna and the fifth house be between malefics and the 
Lagna and the fifth lord be in the sixth, eighth or twelfth 
houses; 
38. If the tenth lord with a malefic is in the third house and Mars 
with a benefic in the fifth house; 
39. If in the Gemini or Virgo there ~re Saturn and Rahu (for 
Aquarius and Taurus) and Mars and Mercury be in the 
twelfth house; 
40. If the Lagna lord be in the third house and the third lord 
be in the fifth house and there are malefics in the Lagna, the 
third and the fifth houses; 
41. If the third lord be in the eighth house and Jupiter ,,"-th 
Saturn and Rahu be in the fifth house; 
42. If the eighth lord be in the fifth with the third lord and the 
eighth house has Saturn and Mars; 
If these combinations are present there will be either no children 
or loss of children as a result of the curse of the brother. 
Curses of Maternal Relations 
43. If Mars is with Rahu in the fifth house with Mercury or 
141 
Jupiter and Saturn is in the Lagna. 
44. If the Lagna lord, the fifth lord, Saturn, Mercury and Mars 
be in the fifth house. 
45. If the fifth lord being combust be in the Lagna, Saturn be 
in the seventh, and the Lagna lord and Mercury be 
conjoined. 
46. If the fourth lord be in the Lagna with twelfth lord and the 
Moon, Mercury and Mars be in the fifth house there will 
be either ho child-birth or children will not survive as a result 
of the curses of maternal uncles. 
Curses of Spiritual Persons 
47. If Rahu be in the house of Jupiter (Sagittarius or Pisces) if 
Jupiter, Saturn and Mars be in the fifth house and the ninth 
lord be in the eighth. 
48. lEthe ninth lord be in the fifth, if Jupiter be with Rahu and 
Mars in the eighth house. 
49. If the ninth lord be debilitated and if the twelfth lord be in 
the fifth with Rahu or aspected by Rahu. 
50. If Jupiter be 'debilitated, Rahu be in the Lagna or the fifth 
house and the fifth lord be in the sixth, eighth, or twelfth 
house. 
51. If Jupiter as the fifth lord be in the eighth (for Leo or 
Scorpio) or if the fifth lord be in the eighth with the Su" 
and the Moon. '\) 
52. IfJupiter who in Navamsha is in Capricorn or Aquarius but 
in the birth horoscope with Saturn and Mars and the fifth 
lord be in the twelfth house. 
53. If Jupiter and Saturn be in the Lagna and Rahu be in the 
ninth house or if Jupiter with Rahu be in the twelfth house; 
then as a result of curses of spiritual persons there will either 
be childlessness or death of children. 
Curses of Wife (or Women?) 
54. 'If the seventh lord be in the fifth, Saturn be in the Navamsha 
of the seventh lord . and the fifth lord be in eighth house; 
142 
55. If the seventh lord is in the eighth, the eighth lord in the 
fifth and Jupiter be with malefic; 
56. If Venus be in the fifth house, the seventh lord be in the 
eighth and Jupiter be with a ,malefic; 
57. If the second house has a malefic, seventh lord be in the 
eighth and there be malefics in the Lagna and the fifth house; 
58. If Venus as the ninth lord (for Virgo or Aquarius); 
59. If Venus is in the ninth house, the fifth lord be in enemy 
house and ifJupiter, Lagna lord and the seventh lord be i11-
placed; 
60. If Rahu with Moon be in the fifth house owned by Venus 
(for Capricorn and Gemini) and if the twelfth house, Lagna 
and the second have malefics; 
61. If Saturn and Venus be in the seventh house, if the eighth 
lord be in the fifth house, the Sun be in the lagna with Rahu; 
62. IfM~rs be in the second house Jupiter be in the twelfth house 
and if Venus, Saturn with Rahu be in the fifth house or 
aspected by them; 
63. If the second and eighth lord be in the eighth, if Mars and 
Saturn be in the lagna and the fifth house, Jupiter be with 
malefic; 
64. If Rahu be in the lagna, Saturn in the fifth, and Mars in the 
ninth and the fifth and the seventh lord be in the eighth; 
then there is childlessness or loss of children as a result of the 
curse of the wife. 
Evil Spirits Causing Childlessness 
65. If there are Saturn and the Sun in the fifth house, weak 
Moon in the sever,.h house and Rahu be in the Lagna, 
Jupiter in the twelfth house; 
66. If Saturn as the fifth lord he in the eighth house, Mars he 
in the Lagna, and Jupiter be in the eighth house; 
67. If a malefic he in the Lagna, the Sun in the twelfth house, 
Saturn, Mars and Mercury in the fifth house and the fifth 
lord be in the eighth; 
143 
68. IfRahu be in the Lagna, Saturn in the fifth house and Jupiter 
in the eighth house; 
69. If Rahu be in the lagna with Venus or Jupiter, and also be 
associated with Saturn and Moon and the Lagna lord be in 
the eighth; 
70. If Jupiter and the fifth lord be debilitated, and if debilitated 
planets aspect them; 
71. If Saturn be in the Lagna, Rahu in the fifth house, the Sun 
in the eighth house and Mars in the twelfth house; 
72. If the seventh lord be in the sixth, eighth or twelfth house, 
the Moon be in the fifth house and the Lagna be with Saturn 
and Gulika; 
73. If Saturn, Venus and the eighth lord be in the fifth house 
and Jupiter be in the eighth house; 
childlessness is caused by evil spirits. 
Prescribed Scheme of Propitiation of Planets 
The scheme for graha shant; or propitiation of planets prescribed 
by Maharshi Parashara which works well in all those cases where 
the worship recommended is done sincerely is as follows : 
1. If childlessness is caused by Mercury and Venus: by worshipping 
lord Shiva. 
2. If caused by the Moon: mantra, yantra and medicines; 
3. If by Rahu: by doing kanya-daan (helping in the marriage 
of a needy marriageable girl) 
4. If by Ketu: gifting away a cow. 
5. If by Saturn and Mars: doing rudra japam (lord Shiva's). . ~ ~ . 
And the over-all method prescribed and most standardised all 
through the centuries is to listen with devotion to the great 
Harivamsha Purana and doing Santan Gopa! recitation which has 
been given here. 
144 
tirll'flfl qIM 1[fr r:p.r 
.a), m W ~ <ffi ~ClCfilt!(1 lj)fCi~ ClIt!~CI "iI11('Qcl J 
~ it (R<f ~ i'CIJ4i mut l'ffi: J J 
a.l> 0f1it ~ qlti~ql2/ 
flrllPfliJ qIMRt);llJ.. 
.IJim' Cfiq ('14 II laj ~q",'ha:"; ~ I 
ti'Hi'lllcai:J <[>Wi ~ q'i'i<::'l'{ II ~ II 
'lqli4~ qlt1~<i t!.HfMlcai:J ~ I 
"'41n<;I~'ld qwf ,il41e1 'l"G'l"G'l'{ II '< II 
.. 
~ ~ ,nfC!"; ",,:!fOf'l"'qfOp<;""'Hm,{ I 
'lqli4~ qlt1~<i ~q",'j'l"G"; ~ II ~ II 
'n41e1 ~ cR: CfiQ('114fdq'<1H,{ I 
9>lI'H'lllcai:J <[>Wi ~ "'19>'li°q,{ II '" II 
9>lICfiIQf£4>('1a; ~ CfiQ('1IQfd,{ I 
~qc6l'l"G"; cR: ti''HMlcai:J lill" II .... II 
4<iiQd ql:U~~ Qau.,I'fl' \i'I"I~" I 
~ ~ <R<i ~ ql~q "I'Ii4ft II G II 
"'41n<;I~'ld qwf ,nfC("; !f'lqfot\H'{ I 
~~~.m41IQ'1'1,{ IllS II 
~ ~q~2Jii'1 <\"I'llfihj{Oii~iI I 
,j)f<1"G ~ wr ~ ~ (qf "I'll~'l II ~ II 
>t'ifl&iI+tG ,i\fCl::e: mf; w ~ 
~ it W!'li <pm flfq: +t 0 il qR"i'l1 "9"lit I I ~ I I 
flfcf+toi)"I<l ~ ~ it W!'li tIW I 
>t'ifl+t::e:I" ~ ~ muf 7ffi: I I ~o I I 
~ClCf>l«H ,ilfCl::e: ql«~q <iI'INa I 
~ it W!'li <pm ~ muf 7ffi: I I ~~ I I 
ClI«aCl <iI'I!i:"ii ~ 9,MIf1+t I 
~ it W!'li <pm ~ muf 7ffi: I I r=< I I 
~ &i+t('lI'1r<l" q .. &ilfifUlc6t'H+t I 
~ it W!'li <pm ~ muf 7ffi: I I n II 
~ 'It":f'IT'I1 ~ 'If-lClR:H I 
~ it W!'li <pm ~ muf 7ffi: II~)! II 
&iI<l&iHor*>Qr4 ClI¥Clr4 'if tIW I 
"llllfl:r ~ fi&;:;i4 ~ 'if I I~" I I 
{I;JlCl~lI ~ l:iqOII~ &'t ~ I 
~ "llllfl:r ~ W!'li ~ it &'t I I ~<, I I 
~ ~ 'I1'lITf4 ;;;IT <iI'INa I 
~ it W!'li <pm ClI¥CI .. +tIQa I I ~19 I I 
w+tlf-l41+tI"",'h ,i1 41ct&IQijH&i I 
~ it W!'li <pm ql~CI <iI'INa II ~t II 
~ G;lIf1UJIM ~ 45"::e:,, I 
.. +tIQa CllfiaCi ~ 'jf'1C1RH II ~~ I I 
145 
146 
qifi~q wi ~ m ~ ~ i 
~ .q. ~ ~ill6Ui cmi ~ ~ i i '10 i i 
~~Wll6Ui~~m:rcr i 
'4 m'l 4:>i { .q. ~ m '14:>'14:>'1 i i '1~ i i 
~ ~ .q. ~ qifi~q ""i(Qd i 
'M<.'1i'1l\!l .ilfCl4:> ~ "!,f"1qf-iiid i i '1'1 i i 
~ moT "'1lfuf ~ moT ~ i 
wi ~ fW:f ~ fW:f ~ m.q. II '1~ Ii 
,ndi~if<HlQi'1~i .. ~ iOlS'14:>'1"l i 
~ ~ CfiN<.'1i4 6ft -m::r i I '1¥ i i 
'14:>'14:>'1 ~ ~ ~ .q. '!flit i 
{'li qd qifi~q fW:f ~ ""i(Qd Ii '1~ Ii 
.i\ql<.'1fs"'1 ."fCl4:> qi~q {'liQd i 
~~ ~ fW:f ~ ""I(Qd i i '119 i i 
'l;:lf.30d4i\'i ~ ~q<il'14:>'1I"1d i 
~ '1ii1fi!fJ g:p;f ~ iOlS'14:>'1 II '1(. i i 
iOliilsfj ~ fW:f ~ ~.q. 9,iift"'1~"l i 
'>lmfii"i'll'lul '{'l'q' Cfi('4~¥ ~ i i '1~ i i 
~~~~~W"'l 
a:r;fcf; m ~ -m::r .q. {'!{'14:>'1 Ii ~o Ii 
~ Bdl'1,i'!41t'i ~ ~'ihChI"a;¥{ 1 
~ 4~B91C<ti lIW ,lIf"'''''''''''d¥{ 1 I ~~ II ~ ~ 
a;.,ChI{~i'ffi ,lI41t'i ~ <lS'1",,'1¥{ I 
<R"il'~m ~Ci<til9,i "1mfl:T <lS'1I<1Ch"l II ~~ II 
Cilti~Ci '3;<'!i:<!:¥T 'of",,,,, "1<lCiI~d I 
~ .q. 'd'l'<i ~ {"I'111!! ~ II ~~ II 
{1"11Ci?t~ 'i'!fCl"" ChN(,(Ill;f m- !l'li't 
fiiif<1ChI I4Ci{ a; ~ .q 'd'l'<i lIW I I ~ ~ 1 1 
al""14~f ... 'I:i 4~~",,{<\4 "1'liQd 1 
~ .q CiH'l"ii {"I'1I<1Ch l1!'lf'Cj' 1 1 ~~ II 
'1",,41('( <lU41('( 'lIf",,,,, <lS'1",,'1 
~ .q 'd'l'<i ~ ~fCl+l 0 il Cii'll'l-f!l'li't 1 1 ~ ~ I I 
a;lfl"""H ,lIfCl"" ~ "1<lCiI~d 
'n41(,( 9,OS{IChIll;f ~.q 'd'l'<i ~ II ~IS II 
~ '1 1 <I Ch wvr '1 o:a;' fl 'tfCj'~1'ti<f 
~ .q 'd'l'<i ~ ~ 9101'1I<1Ch I I ~{. II 
~ Cilf->0d ~ ~ ~ {,,14d I 
~ ~ • Cilti~<I "1'lilid II ~~ II 
{"IM<lfl"ffi' ~: f1p:r 
~ .q 'd'l'<i ~ ~ f&q 0 il <li'll"'!l'li't I I ~o I 1 
iij't:*l"lill;f .lIf",,,,, !10S{lChIIl! ~ 
~ "ll'<lfl<'j}i ~ ~ "1'liQd II ~~ I I 
147 
148 
<ti Hi 0 <H" q tf'mll;T q 'iJ i '1 i '>! fill f'Sl it i 
~ .q. <f'f1i ;pm ~q<l11'1'il;'1'il;'1 i i 'g~ i i 
~qCfli«it ~ qit!ftq "'-iill" i 
Mfit<tii Il QiHC\ ~ .q. <f'f1i m:r i i 'g~ i i 
'AAi1l 'il;H ~ ~f.tU iY,it -.:m:rcr i 
~ .q. <f'f1i -i1 q Cf4 i (Jiqi'\Wi .mtffi i a 'g'g i i 
~ qi«~~~i ~qCfi'lf9<1'1'il;'1 i 
'l'ffill'il;H .q. ~ <f'f1i ~ '!NT i i 'g.... i i 
"'-i~i2i {lli'1i2i ~"I'1i2i C\<lif-lif i 
qi«~ill¥i • ~ .q. <f'f1i '!NT i i 'gl:, i i 
~ <tiIlHq~i~ qi«~q "'-iill" I 
~ .q. <f'f1i ;pm ~ m'IIi 'TO: I I 'g\9 I I 
C\iM'il;H -i1fCl'il; '''l'ffif~itill(J' '!NT i 
~ .q. <f'f1i ;pm ~ m'IIi 'TO: I i 'gt. i I 
-nfl:l'il; 9>0s~l<tii~ {lli'1i2i ~ I 
~ .q. <f'f1i ;pm ~ m'IIi 'TO: I I 'g~ I I 
~ <ti1l(Jiq~l~ -i1fq'il; 1lY,{{i\'1 I 
1l"3>~QiHffi4il~ ~ «Ii "''11~'1 11 .... 0 II 
~ ~ "''1;fl~&I",!'" 
f'Cll'?1Cf!l 1l4f1'lit~woq(JiI*' ''l I 
~ ¥I q,'I"<Ifit'ill liM! ~ 
<I~i1C\Iit;-I<i ~~'il;"l II .... ~ II 
<ll-€isli 'i:niill'; ~ q<UM1'iJ1"1 I 
~ it ~ <pm ~ mui TRf: II '-\'1 II 
a1f!lIcf; 'i:H4+ttflf?i,H1<llfq ""liIl~ I 
m it ~ ~ m:rnr g,f.,qf4l;iI II '-\~ II 
q I "i~ q ""@21 W:rn 'i '6 oil +1 "l I 
~ l1f ~ ;;; <pm ~ilI"Il>(If"'iI II '-\ ~ II 
~ l1f ~;;; <lQna:lf\l<l"1"i';9 I 
llW ;;; 'i :Him'; ~ m:rnr m- I I '-\ '-\ I I 
ql"i~q ""I~It!i .nfCl"<:: ~q<il"iil I 
~ it ~ <:Ill' CfilQli"'<llfu<l"1"<::"1 II ,-\11 II 
q<uqlilll:i' .nfOl"<:: f<:I1SlliT "iJIll1'1' ~ I 
~ it ~ f1'lili!liUI"1I<l<ti "U'!fCl' II ,-\\9 II 
~ <pm ~ilI"Il>"lf\J:Sil g,f.,qf4l;iI I 
~Oil!l'" .mw:r ~ it ~ m;r II '-\l II 
~ it ~ <:Ill' a:QHt!if!l<l"1"<::"1 I 
filill"1I<l<ti '<t>Wll:i' g,"!l;<3j,,<::qWa: II '-\~ II 
fcr41 .. 0 I f<:i <IT ~ >re:+tT m:rnr '9>U 
~ iI(\4<tiI~OI ~ ~ ~ II 110 II 
'qq~<lqa:l~ f,;r,~ f"{"iI{I( 
~ it ~ f1'lill!lIOlqf&j'l( "U'!fCl' II II~ II 
U11 "li<t>1 klq{a: 'illl ill fi'i l!iM!l a: I 
~ it ~ ~ <ti"lMIfi"1qf4l;iI II 11'1 II 
149 
150 
"{Ill U'!lC! .mwr ~UiijGl ~ it I 
'Il1'<lq('Q~~dl-' a:~HSlII('QGI .mtffi II <\~ II 
~ 
~ €I <61 'I 'l.i<:i;;m; ....rn-a:rfu <1'1 "a: '1 I 
~ it O'i<i"{lll ~ 'nql& ~ II <\'ll II 
~ ~ 'nf<l'a: ql"l'1Ii1d ~ I 
~ it O'i<i ~ 'n401l&<6'1I<1<6 II <\'-\ II 
'Oqa@ ~ 'nfC4"a:I"'1d ~ I 
~ it O'i<i ~ ql'li~q GI'I('Qcl II <\<\ II 
ftmg ftmg ~ ~qc6h"a:;fjs<i 
ftm<r ftm<r '\1iW 'Ill' <lq('Q ~ ('11 i11l' I 
...:;I ~ ~ " " , 
ftmg ftmg mm ~ MiI:i\ 
ftmg ftmg ~ ci~lf<lMI{~ .. il: II <\IS II 
W4ai ql'li~il'1 "i1'1'<IT 11ftg;q-: wr: I 
~ ~: fildl'1I<1&;'1 m:r >rn' II <\t II 
"{Ill U'!lC! 'nf<l'a: ~qCfi1'1id ~ I 
~ it O'i<i ~ 'nQ"@<6'1I<1<6 II <\ '{ II 
ci~lf<lMHci> ~ ~ it 1!Iy.fl:«'1 I 
wi ~ wi ~ ~ mtrf Tffi: II ISo II 
1!I1!I1"tftiSG'\1<1 ~ ~ 111'tlqli1d 
wi ~ wi ~ ~ mtrf Tffi: II IS~ II 
'<I"i(I<l><6iAQQ;J O'i<i ~ ~ I 
wi ~ wi ~ ~ mtrf Tffi: II IS~ II 
( 
fOl{lICl.<i ~f'jPl'<i ~ m ~ I 
~ it m ;p;oT ~ClCIil"l'<::"1 '!NT IIIS~ II 
"'I"Iffil:f "(q'f ~ ~ CliI'HV( I 
~ 9.Us~lClilai .TlfOl"; "lq\1!W( II IS'<' II 
~ ;p;oT .nfOl'<:: f1c\,,*,I"lCfl&ig~ I 
~ it m (Oqlfi\@I"lii '1!f{tri Tffi: II IS .... II 
(Oqlfqf<i5i ~TIIl;p;oT~~ I 
~ it m ~ ~ '1!f{tri Tffi: II 1Sf; II 
m ~ 'i'lfOl'<:: ~ CIi"l('1lqil I 
wi ~ wi ~ ~ '1!f{tri Tffi: II ISIS II 
qi(jlqil qi(j~" gq""'it"lCii 1JW I 
wi ~ wi ~ ~ '1!f{tri Tffi: IIISG II 
~1~'il9h'I~I<SI'ipill~rqro'f {"llqil I 
~ it m ;p;oT ~ '1!f{tri Tffi: I I 1Sf{ II 
"1'< 14 0 I "{111";:rT%T '( I "" j C( q " & ') 'it., I 
wi it ~ ~ qi(jqi(jljClf.e;a II Go II 
TIll mfCj' .flfCJ'<:: ~ClCI>"ICI{"I'<::"1 I 
fif<l+1un'1l\!1 • "IH~lfi\{1{lf~a II G~ II 
~CfCI>'t >iTfci:e: ~cr 'it • I f4 il I 
~ it m .mw .j'tqoU&iCli'114C1i II G~ II 
':!.f-lClf.e;a 'i'lfOl'<:: fif<l+1unClWi'i '!NT I 
~ it m ;p;oT ~ m11i Tffi: II G~ II 
151 
152 
.",.ftl q:; I f"1'oq~'l'flIT';:<l:nnf) Ii I 'H'I I 
~ it m wm ~ ~ 7fif: I I 6'g I I 
{liIM4qt~(>i +mrcr q:;llia: 
~ ~ ~ ~ 7fif: 116'-\11 
CiI'd~Ci {lil"l~ <l:H4I"i 1i{j'&i9a: I 
~itmwm~~7fif: 116<, II 
q:;(RIIOI9a: InfCl"a: ~ lif"lCif.:a:d I 
~ ~ 
~ it m wm ~ ~ 7fif: II 619 II 
~ !i'!fi.e:~1 '6fqq 0 il CiWl>i >!'lit I 
~itmwm~ ~7fif: 1166 II 
'i0:S~lq:;la:r lj)fCl"a: CiI'd~Ci ",11i4d I 
~ it m wm ~ ~ 7fif: II 6'{ II 
a:4If"lQ CiI'd~Ci ~ !iPICif.:a:d I 
~ it m wm ~ ~ 7fif: II '{o II 
Y,lIflllIl'\l<l:ldd IflfCl"« ~Ci'{!~"'d"L I 
Ci"a:IIi~ m\f <pm ~ II '{~ II 
q:;1'604f"ltlii InQ1CiWl'l.l1'4' Ii{l{ii I 
~ 
~ ~ ~ it m fi;rlir II '{~ II 
"%1 ¢t {it Q 114 '6 fqq 0 il Ci Fll'l.l'T<f ~ I 
~ it m ~ Inqou&iq:;,,14q:; II '{~ II 
~ CiI'd~CiI4 ~ ~ 
Y,lIa:14 ~ flq;S::Qllf .. <t {'ltQllf .. <t II '{'g II 
\ {§''''lIf~i {'II'1I'" 'I§'i."i!lG l\'IllCf 
~ it <f'1<i ~ ,n4"1Ii."iCli'1I<1C1i I I ~~ II 
G"'H4 it wi' ~ {j'1'1'(H mr<f 
wi' ~ wi' ~ ljli ~ {l1I4d "~I\ " 
<mTGli1'1<1I~>tGI'1{i1: .t{GT I 
~ it <f'1<i ~ ~ mui 1'ffi: II ~IS II 
'If~6G~Ci 'nfC4'( CiI«~Ci 'l1'1I~'1 I 
~ it <f'1<i ~ ~ mui 1'ffi: II ~G II 
4lfd'lli MCi I ilJftt fCltilCii19 !I'l1I<1d I 
"PI4RCi'¥4 1<1119 CiI«~<lt~q:f"'i1 II ~~ II 
<f:~ 'i~"'Ii1<f; fi1sNfI"i~Cili ~ I 
~CiI~CiClif\!(d tffi~(H tpSIl<I 15f II ~oo II 
'l14CliItl; 4afw"; ~ ~ ~ I 
~ {1'l1f1"'ll'i mit <f!ftr 'l~: II ~o~ II 
153 

SECTION FIVE 
CHAPTER FIFTEEN 
The Final Conclusion: 
Predestination 
In this book are given some of the best and most deeply tested 
techniques dealing with childlessness and mishaps to children, 
which I learnt from my mother, late K. Sarasvani Devi, and 
developed through my own researches. My mother put me nearly 
on an oath not to reveal what she had taught me but I somehow 
squeezed out of her a promise and permission to allow me to 
teach some of these, mainly, because there are more quacks in the 
field of astrology these days than in any other field. 
Such quackery has been more evident in the field of predictions 
in mundane astrology where political predictions have been 
wildest and most irrationaL What many people may not be 
knowing is that even in traditional areas like marriage and birth 
of children, the old orthodox astrologers, some of them very 
honest and respectable ones too have been failing mainly because 
of wrong birth data and wrongly cast horoscopes. 
The new brand of astrologers, with no training and, well­
published markets, have been giving disastrous predictions both 
about marriage and children. 
It is to help our well-trained astrologers, who have passed 
Jyotish Visharad and some other good astrologers elsewhere, in 
India and abroad that the books we are producing are being 
written. It is not being claimed, that these books and the 
astrological techniques we are discussing are final word. But what 
we are giving in our books is what has never been given ever in 
any book before with illustrated examples. In all other books there 
is merely theorising or pedantic display of the knowledge of 
astrological classics, which cause more constipation and confusion 
than a technique of prediction. Our aim is to produce papers and 
book with lucid, replicable techniques. 
156 
It is with this purpose that in the book some tested methods 
relating to astrological predictions about children have been 
given. Let it be repeated that some of the more unhappy 
astrological techniques have been not even mentioned in the 
passing lest they fall into the . hands of unscrupulous and 
mercenary astrologers who are too many now. 
The Menace ofBhrigu and Nadi Readings 
In the meantime many persons who have had their readings done 
through Bhrigu Samhita and Nadi books of S'outh India have 
shown us some readings, part of which are correct about the past 
only, but even then so vague and misleading that it created a 
terrible doubt in our minds about the utility of these books. The 
readings I collected about others and also about myself have been 
baseless, contradictory and even absurd. 
In one reading of Nadi where I was present, a sentence read 
out was, "here is present a very good astrologer whose janma 
nakshatra is Chitra but in Libra rashi". It was about me and also 
true. But I had my own doubts whether it was from the book or 
from some minor siddhi (supernormal power) of the nadi-reader. 
I rang up Dr. B. V. Raman and asked him about it. He alone has 
the correct Dhruva Nadi and he hopes to complete his book on 
nadi in two years time, by say, 1995. 
Dr. Raman told me that it could not be from nadi literature 
but a khudra (minor) siddhi of the nadi-reader. I then asked Dr. 
Raman to let me know about his own investigations into nadi 
literature which I cold quote both in India and abroad, since, at 
the end of October, 1993 I was scheduled to go to USA as the 
Chief guest and keynote speaker to the Second International 
Symposium of Vedic Astrologers of U. S.A. to San Rafael, 
California (November 18-22, 1993). 
Since I am a bachelor and childless, I decided to include here the 
readings sent from Dhruva Nadi by Dr. Raman about me with 
my comments in italics. 
Once again I have to repeat that to be sincere and truthful even 
in astrological pursuit one has to have the high ethical standard 
of a Raman, to understand what nadi literature is. Some books 
on Nadi which have come out in the market are mere hack-work, 
very expensive though, which reveal the greater confusion of the 
157 
translator and writer without showing how a nadi-amsha is to be 
decided. 
Fortunately, since Dr. Raman has sent readings about me 
which are fantastically correct, let me reproduce them with my 
comments at the end of each point in italics along with 
Dr. Raman's letter. 
158 
Letter written to Mr. KN Rao by Dr. B. V. Raman 
October 6, 1993 
Dear Mr. Rao, 
As earlier written to you, enclosed please find a note on Nadi 
Astrology which may be of some use to you when dealing with 
the subject during your coming visit to U.S.A. 
As I have said several times in my writings and speeches, we 
can make a broad division of the extant Nadigranthas into Mantric 
and Tantric, the former mainly based on the power and control 
of Kshudra Mantras but under astrological cover and the letter, 
mostly mathematical and partly based on Mahamantras. 
In my lecture at Veda Vidya Pratishthan in December 1991 
and in my key-note address delivered at the Santa Fe Symposium 
in U.S.A. details about Nadis have been given. I hope you have 
copies of these issues. 
Whatever I have written in this letter is for your private 
information only, as I feel you are a sincere and ardent astrological 
savant genuinely interested in upholding its validity, despite the 
onslaughts of ill-informed critics and the denationalised media. 
If! remember aright it was exactly on November 28,1953 that 
one Narayana Sastty paid me a surprise visit and handed over the 
literature bearing on Nadi astrology along with a maha mantra 
which I was cautioned should never be revealed to anyone until 
and unless the instruction by way of a code word is revealed in 
the Nadi itself. 
The late Justice Ramesam Pantalu had such a work in his 
possession. In my meetings with him he gave some details about 
Nadi Amsas but the secret of interpretation was not revealed just 
because the code word never appeared in the Grantha . Before his 
death however, he came across the code-word according to which 
the Nadi should be thrown into the sea which he did. The 
rationale continues to be a mystery. Perhaps the original authors 
did not want the secrets to fall into unscrupulous hands. Money­
making was never their object. 
Upto the division of Nadi Amsha and its being tagged on to 
the positions of Jupiter, Saturn, the Sun and the Moon it is 
mathematics. But when the amsha in a particular Lagna is to be 
interpreted, something other than mere astrological principles 
159 
becomes involved. It is only after the recitation of the clue mantra 
at this stage, for the prescribed number of times that the results 
come more or less as a flash. 
Of course each Nadi amsha has certain definite results, as 
earlier serialised in The Astrological Magazine, but in applying 
these results to an individual horoscope the Sun, the Moon, 
Saturn, Jupiter and other planets enter the picture. 
The Amsha it tagged on to the amsas of the other planets also 
and automatically the astrologer gets an image of the horoscopic 
indications. 
I use the Nadi techniqde only for purposes if rectifying the time 
if birth on the basis of the Amsha and some identifYing factors. 
In very rare cases such as those ofIndira Gandhi or Rajiv Gandhi, 
this N adi technique has been used. 
The Dasha system followed is of course Vimshottari though 
sometimes vague references are made to Jaimini and Kalachakra. 
Taking your own case: for the time of birth furnished by you 
viz. 7-54 a.m. (on October 12, 1931 at Machi1ipatnam) the 
ascendant is Libra 23'3'. 
The first Nadi dictum is ('i1;8jQ;&1l'1 f<ffir<:r "'f ~1'f<l'l<iI''1 f.'ruf<r:) 
"without knowing the N adi amsha even the correct ascendant 
cannot be decided." 
In this case Libra 23'3' falls in the 116th Amsha ~). The result 
is (ti-:llMI ~ WIT ~ ~ I '1!<;\Jl"1 ~ f.'rc<i ~ TIlT 
\Jlld<t>'Il (Maitri amsha, 1st part, in Libra Lagna indicates the birth 
of a Sudra, always happy, being the 7th issue to his parents). This 
is ruled out in your case. Then the other Amshas considered are : 
117 Hamni (23'12' to 23'24') 
118 Harini (23'24' to 23'36') 
119 Marut (23'36' to 23'48') 
120 Dhananjaya (23'48' to 24') 
Retrospectively, the following were also considered : 
114 Vamni (22°48' to 23') 
113 Jalaplava (22'36' to 22'48') 
112 Vahini (22'24' to 2236') 
111 Swadha (22'12' to 22'24') 
110 Kunjanakirti (22' to 22'12') 
109 Kokila (21'48' to 22') 
(all in Libra) 
160 
Actually the Lagna fIxed is 22° Libra which means the Nadi 
Amsa is Kokila. 
Haruni (No. 117 - 23°12' to 23°24') indicates: 
"One born in Haruni in Libra Lagna, the lord of Lagna 
occupying the Lagna will belong to Shudravarna, having no elder 
brother (6,<,u<i~~ g<'I1 W"r ~ <'I''"!,(lfM ~<;Cfil<'l ~\i1It1'fl1 
~ FcltfHql'j). 
Likewisejalaplavamsa (No. 113 - 22·36' to 22·48') gives the 
birth in a kshatriamsha (\i1<'1C('1cj~~ g<'I1 W"r, ~ <'I''"!,(I~I'~ 
all'5lCfiI<'l ~\i1I~'flI ~ Fcll31,"!qI 'j). 
Wading through different amshas and eliminating those that 
did not apply and corresponding to the backward count: Kokila 
in Libra Lagna is found to be more appropriate in your case. 
To fInd the characteristics etc., of a native an elaborate search 
of the Grantha is needed as the index was not given, on the plea 
it had been lost. 
I am enclosing some versus on a separate sheet from Dhruva 
Nadi bearing on your horoscope (Kokilamsa Libra Lagna tagged 
on to Jupiter-Saturn-Sun-Moon positions) for your information. 
I am .also enclosing herewith for your information xerox of the 
original copied manuscript in Devanagari and TelugulKannada 
scripts. The language is easy to read and understand, grammati­
cally not correct and is styled paisachika. And the details I have 
furnished above are for your personal information only. Of course 
you are welcome to use it, if you so desire, at the American 
conference. 
I have almost come out of my astrological studies and getting 
more and more immersed in Sadhana. But sometimes I do attend 
conferences and discussions. Any way within the two years you 
have given me to live, God willing, I wish to complete at least 
a part of Dhruva Nadi. 
The Americans appear to be more genuinely interested in 
learning Hindu astrology and you have an opportunity to guide 
them properly. 
Wishing you all success and a safe and successful trip to U.S.A. 
and trusting you are in good health and spirits, 
Yours sincerely, 
B.V. Raman 
WIT c;p;j Cf)l~<1i~i 
Libra Lagna Kokilamsha 
1. Cfi~ Fcl> <,MI '<R c;rr.'r fcIq ijj I <'I i ~I ~ I 
Fcl!Olcj~1 '{1:!<'1?i'1 ~<lI'1~ "ffIlT Cli:~: II 
161 
Born in Kokilamsa in a Chara Lagna in Viprakalamsa Nadi 
the native is a Brahmin, darkish in complexion and with a 
well-proportioned body. 
Correct, 1 was born in Brahmin family and have darkish 
complexion. 
2. ~ !Ol1'T<l,hl ~ql<'l<l wrr -;;;;;: I 
\'ltNi~~ 31!ld61~ '1GI!OlI"fil ~ II 
The place of birth is on the shores of a sea and has a temple 
nearby. If birth in Uttaramsa (latter half of Kokilamsa) the 
place will be an agrahara near a river. 
Correct, 1 was born on a sea-shore (but there is no agraharam 
or river near it) 
3. ~ ~'l1TWl ~ q\)ciil ~ m I 
~ ~l1.f ~ ~ ~"'1ql~ m\1:<PTB ~'1lR1'11111 
Jupiter exalted occupies Kumbha Navamsha; Saturn in Keeta 
(V rischika) N avamsha; Sani in Sagittarius; birth in 4th 
quarter of Chitta, in the morning, on a Monday. 
Except the Moon being in the fourth quarter if Chitra other 
planets have bem mentioned correctly. 
4. ~~ ~ c:iiflOIl<l"l crffi I 
<fR!T '<I~I'I~ ~ '1<F<14ar ~: II 
Birth in the 5th lunar year from Prabhava (viz., Prajotparti) 
Dakahyinayana, Varsha ritu, Sun in Kanya, 1st day of bright 
Comments in italics are by the author Mr K.N. Rao 
162 
half of lunar month is certain. 
Correct hundred percent. 
5. g<'!T c;r9 'q wR fmT c;r9 (j~ I 
\Yf'+l 8lq;~ol +IT m<T ~ ~ .tp(>j ~ II 
Birth in Thula Lagna, head-appearance in the same, results 
portrayed are based on Janma, Sira and Adhana Lagnas. 
I do not know about the other two lagnas mentioned here. 
6. 'q'ii!';~'<1 fljN?lI~'i'l1I"i rtl?fJ" '1iliili't I 
~ ~ '<1~1«l1<t ~tT 8i~li~i x:fIiq: II 
Born in Chandra Hora, Mithuna Drekkana, Mesha Navamsha 
and Budha Thrimsamsa . 
Again all correct. 
7. '(1I~q;1 ~olql't ~ '1'<tillcnQ fflct41'lql'tl 
W'1 $'ii'ld ~ *i'HR~II<t q~<lh II 
Satwic by nature, ordinary Yoga, as a child; Jupiter in a Lagna 
Kendra, Yoga dawns after 40. 
I cannot comment on this. It is for others to decide about it. 
8. ~ ~ <WT 1'f1'iI ~: I 
~ mtll"f f4 ~q i fl) g R ~ i iii '( 'Ij-RITh""Ii"'1 ""''111 
Born in this Yoga, the native is famous, liking Gods and 
Brahmins and devoted to Hari and Hara. 
Yes I worship both Vishnu and Shiva. 
9. tfC<fT 'CIC 'ffil1~ ri ~ ~"ffi1i111 
~ fWr W'f~ "WcR '<1\J1~q41 II 
Highly capable, has gift of the gab, specialist in writing, and 
living by serving the Government. 
Correct largely. 
163 
10. 3T~ W1~ x:q\il~9> 1<6)R\+i1'1 I 
em- ~ RlifI'1~ij ~~ ~ II 
Capable of earning money, well-known amongst .his Own 
relatives, not having wife or children, interested in listening 
to Satkathas. 
Correctly analysed Here come in the role of predestination "on 
having wife or children". This can be seen in my horoscope also. 
11. "f<I1i"if\1~ ~ ~ ~ 'IfC!fu I 
~ <'1''1,(I~lxit xN'1It'd 00 ~ ft~ II 
The native is the 4th issue, has one sister. As Mars is in 
Lagna total brothers and sisters 7 or 8. 
Correct. I am the fourth issue. But I have four sisters (one dead 
now) not one. We are, including me, total eighth brothers and 
sisters. 
12. l1RIT 10I<l(1( ~ g"lRl4cp,(1 ~ I 
~ ~ wAr !Jt'!Rltll RI~II'<~ II 
Mother is one of character, docile, loving the native. Such 
a mother is an expert in Grah. Vidya. 
The description about my mother isfexact. She was a very greater 
astrologer and I learnt my astrology from her. 
13. "fiolRr Rl4<111 ~, WI 1Wff RI~II,(C;: II 
Native is somewhat interested in music and an expert in 
Hoonabh.sh. (English?) 
Correct. I have composed many tunes ofsongs and Sanskrit stotras 
without learning music. 
14. ?!'CT Gi~Ii~1 ~: r&[q[l4 >l<j1°IClI11 
~qlqlt1'(lt{ \J4~R1f4,\ ~ >lRi4C1lill 
Born in Budha Thrimsamsa, he is an expert in 2 languages. In 
the second half ofBudha Dasa, he becomes fitmous, as Jyotirvid. 
Correct. I write and speak in both English and Hindi. It is in 
the Mercury period that my books on astrology have come out. 
164 
15. ~ oWNI~I'{{1) t1Ci"lFc1('( ~tJCP: I 
TfUICl'i fctw >l41 0 1 ~'tl '< 1 ,i@ ~ >l R1 '!i Ii 1 i I I 
Lord of 9 in 12, he will preach philosophy; expert in 
calculations and becomes . famol!ls through the. rulers 
(Government?) 
Largely correct. 
16. 1'lffi) CO"1 ~ 'tl~ 'Qtt> Xi Ii f.iJ 2i I 
~ 1i'"G<ll·'H ~'l'i., "+JFc1IS1:JR'i11 
Lord of 7 in Lagna, Moon with Sukra and Saturn in the 
third, there will be no acquisition of wife. 
17. fiqC;i~1 -,m ~ Fc1~<lI'<1'ffi ~f<&~'tll 
§ltlW:\ ~ -.ri 3l"'l'<-::I~1 ~ II 
As Venus is in Sampadamsa, the native is sometimes sensual. 
His vow of celebracy (Brahmacharya vrata) breaks because of 
an outside lady. 
Remarkably correct. It happens between my age of thirty and 
thirty-five. 
18. ~ (>j"1'<I~I'{{1) c;1,<cpl'<'li ~ I 
'hI1 'i(>j 1('( ~ fclcrrt( tfI'"jq 1 i "lfClRl1 I 
Lord of 7 in Lagna, conjoins Venus. He was deprived of 
marriage because of a woman. 
Vaguely correct. 
19. ~"'CR:" ~ ~ (>jl<j'<1~1'11 
CjjNCf; ~ ~ '1Cf ~ ~ II 
The Moon in Lagna, lord of 8th in Lagna and Karaka in 
the 3rd confers a longevity of 79 years. 
May be c.orrect. 
20. ~ c;q;qxl~I'(~ 1Wil ~ ~ I 
f?lq,!(1lq CfClfilct ~ "l1TC/: ~ [4~l~d: II 
165 
Lord of the 9th in the 12th, Saturn aspecting the 9th, very 
little happiness from father; much happiness from mother. 
My father was mostly in British jail during the independence 
movement and was with Mahatma Gandhi mostly. He died 
when I was thirty years, and I was away from him because ~f 
my postings in the Indian Audit and Accounts Department. 
21. CblFc\J(1i~l ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ I 
[4qll\liI ~1JtPI fqq f.1;q\UI 'il~~ct II 
Kokilamsa, Chara Lagna, the Sun in the 12th; in the Vipat 
(3rd) Dasa Sun's sub-period, father's death will take place. 
Yes father's death took place roundabout Jupiter-Sun (1961). 
22. ~ ~ fi g(1I'f<1'l ~ I 
f<l'ildIR<a CIlI&i'f11lq ~ ~ II 
In the 4th Dasa, Jupiter's Bhukti when Saturn transits end 
of Thula the mother may die as a widow. 
Yes my mother died in Saturn Jupiter period and Saturn was in 
Tula then (1984 December). 
23. ~ (1"1'121 d<{)~l'1 'H'l~d I 
CIl.k<lI'1l~ ~ ~ xl\i1x)Q;Q1 II 
Lord of 2nd in Lagna associated with Lagna lord, lord of 
10th being Moon, livelihood is by serving Gavernment. 
Yes I was a central government officer. 
24. '11'11~~1 IlRi<&lfI1 '(:q\i1~!! 'tl~Rt'lI't1 
8i~nqR [4~I'H-q ~~fMI [4tllgfti'lI't11 
He will become famous and also well-known amongst his 
kith and kin, especially after 30. He will complete education 
when he is about 26. 
I can now say that it is correct. 
166 
25. ~ ~ ft 'l~"tlcB ~I 
~ <>frq; Wlal XSfTf Fcl'i:ll'(ili~ II 
In the 4th Dasa, Rahu Bhukti coinciding with Jupiter's transit 
of Scorpio he defends astrology before the public (an assembly). 
Fantastically correct. On December 26,1982 I deflnded astrology 
bifOre a very large gathering in the Pyarelal Bhawan New Delhi 
and had world publicity. 
26. !>IC'<jCf~C;I;Q ~ '!1ct1lRk I 
~ <n?I1 >rc;: "1T'1T ~ F,Fcln'L~m"'lct: II 
In the Dasa of Pratyakshar(Mercury) and the Bhukti of 
Moon, he gets good name, undertakes a foreign trip and 
becomes famous in different countries. 
Yes in Mercury-Moon (November 1993) I will be addressing a 
gathering 0/ astrologers in the USA. 
== ?"'l~">; , nr\~'t:2rrr.l 27. \li"'"lt1lx C;~IICfiI<>1 <11<>1'(1'1 1141;SQlil 
,iq"ctlx C;~IICfiI~.~ "l1IQ'lRililill 
In the first Dasa, the native suffers from infantile 
troubles. There will be birth of a brother in the 2nd Dasa 
own Bhukti. 
Yes I was sickly in my childhood. 
28. ~ C;MI~ ctIlRf'lRi: Fcl~Fcl~ I 
~ 'lRi~"I '1~ "I1fl1 'tI'1 1 G\41 II 
In the Dasa of the 9th lord, fame increases, gets more income 
and earns money through astrology. 
Perhaps it will come out correct. Let me wait and watch. 
29. !>I,<1~C;I;Q \3ffi1if ~ 1i'11'tlGi I 
~Qm$1ol ~ '<1C'Cfi2.TI ~ II 
In the 5th Dasa (Mercury), latter-half, he will have increased 
expenditure and mental affliction, worshipping of gods and 
Brahmanas and listening to religious discourses. 
This too will come out correct. 
167 
30. q,~ ~ 3JTIlC1 fI"'"Ilfl '<4l<iid ~' II 
In Ketu Dasa Guru Bhukti he will take apat-sanyasa 
(becomes an ascetic). 
Most likely. It nearly happened and in 19891 was going to take 
Sanyas. I was then passing through Mercury-Ketu. Now the 
prediction is for Ketu-Jupiter. 
31. cggGllJ ~: ~ CfRIlT +R:'ll 
'1cNi«1 <61C"lI~'j ~ifC1qlll "I~~;'J ~ II 
In Ketu Dasa, Budha Bhukti coinciding with transit of 
Kanya by Saturn, when he will be 79, he will pass away on 
a Saturday, bright half of the lunar month, when the Sun is 
passing through Scorpio. 
Well die 1 will someday. When? God knows. 1 do not know about 
my own date of death. 
32. ~61"lJ fll;R!~ilR! qlqgOlj "fI1'f . ~ I 
Cf) 'I f¢ <i1 i ~ I q;c;[ ~ J;K<far "lJTIfci l'fCfl'! I I 
He gets Sadgati after leaving his body due to the balancing 
of his Papa and Punya. 
The results attributed for Kokilamsa will be true, is the 
opinion oj Sage Bhargava. 
Both my mother, my spiritual guru, Swami Paramanand 
Saraswati and Yogi Bhaskarananda my Jyotish guru have told 
me that it would be my last birth. Ketu with exalted Mercury 
in my twelfth house aspected by my fifth lord, Saturn and ip 
Jaimini astrology, Mercury in the twelfth from my Karakamsha 
and sixth from my Amatyakaraka is the astrological promise that 
it will be my last birth and that 1 will have salvation after my 
death. 
God bless you. 
168 
Check List cum Questionnaire - I 
Promise of Children 
1. Examine the benefic influences on the fifth house. 
2. Examine the benefic influences on the fifth lord. 
3. Examine the condition of the Navamsha lord of the fifth lord 
of the birth horoscope, and benefic influences on it. 
4. Examine the Navamsha lord of the seventh lord and benefic 
influences on it. 
5. See if the Lagna lord and the fifth lords are in quadrants. 
6. General weaknesses of the Lagna lord, the fifth lord and 
. Jupiter and their placement should not be baneful. 
Check List cum Questionnaire - II 
Childlessness or Mishaps to Children and Curses 
1. Weakness of the fifth lord. 
2. Weakness of the Lagna lord. 
3 . Weakness of the seventh lord. 
4. Weakness of the ninth lord. 
5. Weakness of Jupiter. 
These five points must always be examine first. 
Such weakness can be caused in many ways : 
(a) Malefic influences on the five factors mentioned here. 
(b) Ill-placement of the fifth lord particularly. 
(c) Weakness of Jupiter particularly, or predominant malefic 
influence on it. 
169 
Check List cum Questionnaire - m 
In addition to the Check List II examine additionally the 
following: 
Part I Weakness of the Sun, Jupiter and the tenth house. 
Part II Weakness of the Moon and the fourth house. 
Part III Weakness of the third house, its lord and Mars. 
Part IV Weakness of the seventh house and Venus. 
Part V If Mandi is calculated and along with Rahu and Saturn 
and fifth lord or the fifth house there is affiiction to the fifth house, 
and also Jupiter. 
Check List cum Questionnaire - IV 
Repeat all the exercises given both for blessings for children and 
obstructions by applying all the checks given here to the 
Saptamsha horoscopes invariably. Do not stop with the exami­
nation of the birth horoscope merely. 
/ 
170 
SOME PUZZLES TO BE SOLVED 
Given here are four cases with case histories. Cast the Saptamsha 
in all these cases and solve the problems. There are hundreds of 
horoscopes of persons, male and female, with no children, or 
children who did not survive and with very few children surviving. 
Collect those horoscopes and add to the blank horoscopes forms 
given here. Do at least ten such excercises. 
Puzzle One 
The facts of the case are : 
1. This girl took her boy friend to her house and decided to stay 
with her rich widow mother. 
2. The mother of the girl fell in love with the boy and married 
him. 
Lagna 
Mercury 
Mars 
Rahu 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Lagna 
Moon 
Mars 
Saturn 
Mercury 
Sun Jupiter Venus 
Female 
April 19, 1954 
BaL of Rahu 
Oy 1m21d 
Moon 
Sat (R) 
28' 12' 
5'43' 
19'53' 
Sun 
Jupiter 
Rahu 
Saptamsha 
Ketti 
Ketu 
Ketu 
4 
5 
Mars 9' 09' 
Mercury 16'34' 
Jupiter 29'56' 
6 
Mars 
Rahu 
8 
7 
Moon 
Saturn R) 
Venus 
Saturn (R) 
Rahu 
25' 18' 
13'21' 
25'1 2' 
~--------~~~M~o-o-n--~ 
Venus 
Sun 1 
Rahu2 
Jup. 
Lagna 
Mars 
11 
Mercury 
171 
3. The old mother wanted to have a baby and knew that she 
could not conceive a child anymore. 
4. She persuaded her daughter, whose original boy friend, her 
young husband had now become, to become pregnant on the 
promise of the payment of a huge sum. 
5. The daughter agreed to do it on the condition that later the 
fertilised ovum was transferred to the test tube. 
6. So this girl became the mother of the baby from her step father 
who was her boy friend. 
Puzzle Two 
In 1983 he became the fa.ther of a girl given birth to by a Russian 
class-mate of his. 
Later he (an Indian) met and married an Indian and became 
Moon 
Ketu 
JuP (R) 
Sat (R) 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Lagna 
Venus 
Mercury 
Rahu 
Sun 
Jupiter, 
Mars 
Male 
July 1960 
Birth time 
corrected 
3"30' 
2130' 
27"52' 
Saturn 
Saptamsha 
Sun 
Venus 
Mer (R) 
Rahu 
Lagna 
Mars 
Mereury (R) 
Jupiter (R) 
Ketu 
Moon 
Mars 
Moon Mars Ketu 
23'03' Venus 3'11' 
3' 36' Saturn (R) 21"25' 
2'38' Rahu 23'40' 
Saturn 
1 
2 Lagna 
12 Sun 3 9 Jupiter 6 
Ketu 45 Mars 8 
7 
Moon 
172 
a father of another daughter in 1990. 
By Indian standards he will be deemed to be the father of one 
illegitimate daughter and another legitimate one. But from the 
Russian view point it was in accordance with the state policy of 
the communist Russia of 1983 which encouraged addition to its 
population as of primary importance. 
Puzzle Three 
His first son died as a result of the negligence of the doctors in 
USA. He filed a legal case and won it getting a compensation of 
fifty thousand dollars. 
Notice the combust Jupiter, the fifth lord with the eleventh and 
the eighth lord Mercury in the second house of monetary gains. 
Mercury as the eighth lord is the lord of compensations, 
insurance, windfall money while as the eleventh lord combining . 
with the second and fifth lord, Jupiter in the second house got 
Rahu 
Male 
Moon Jan. 1, 1949 Saturn 6"47' 
Mars 4" (R) 
Mercury Lagna Sun lrI2' Kern 
Jup. !7'l6' Venus 
173 
him money on account of a mishap in the delivery of his wife. 
But that became a source of monetary gain for him. 
Puzzle Four 
From February 1990 upto February 1991, even two years after 
marriage she had not conceived. Doctors declared that she would 
not be able to conceive. 
Astrologically the prediction was that she would conceive in 
the middle. of 1993. She conceived in July 1993. 
Explain it astrologically. 
Saturn 
Mercury 
Lagna 
Sun 
Moon 
Sun 
Rahu Venus 
A married 
woman 
Ketu Lagna Mars (R) 
19"13' 
4"31' 
14"38' 
Jupiter 
Moon 
Mars (R) 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
10 
12 
Sat. 
Mer. 
12"53' 
2"14' 
9 
1 
Sun 
Rahu 
8 
11 5 
2 
Venus 
Venus 
Saturn 
Rahu 
4 
Jup. 
Moon 
3 
11"37' 
12"16' 
14"13' 
174 
Lagna Jupiter 
Sun Venus 
Moon Saturn 
Mars Rahu 
Mercury Ketu 
175 
Lagna Jupiter 
Sun Venus 
Moon Sa~rn 
Mars Rahu 
Mercury Ketu 
I 
176 
Lagna Jupiter 
Sun Venus 
Moon Saturn 
Mars Rahu 
Mercury Ketu 
177 
Index 
Analysis 
of afflicted 5th house and lord for 
delay in child birth, 78, 83, 88, 
90, 93, 97; 98, 102, 103 
of four-fold analysis of 5th house! 
5th lord, 58 
of involvement of Lagna, 5th, 9th 
house and lords for birth of 
child, 15 to 20, 65, 116, 117, 
168, 169 
of parameters of promise of child 
birth in a horoscope, 110 
of parents' horoscope in details for 
promise of child birth, 55 to 60 
of Dr. Raman's horoscope and 
S.pt.msha for his progeny, 110, 
111 
of Saturn and Jupi~ers aspect for 
child birth, 112 
of three-fold analysis of 5th house 
(5th lord), 56 
Aspects 
on 5th house for delay in child 
birth, 85 
of Jupiter for child birth, 7, 15 to 
20, 40, 43 
of Mars for child birth, 7, 22, 40, 
43,78 
of Moon for child birth, 7, 40, 43 
of Retrograde Saturn on 5th house 
for worries from the progeny, 
65,66 
of Saturn for child hirth, 7, 15 to 
20,40, 43 
of Saturn and Jupiter on 5th and 
9th house and their lords for 
child birth, 112 
Charts 
of Saptamsha, 54 
Combinations 
for continuous birth of children, 
58 
for delay in child birth, 78 to 84 
for denial of progeny, 137 to 143, 
168 169 
for infantile mortality, 103 
for loss of children, 137 
for miscarriages, 93, 97 
for mishaps to children, 137 
for obstacles to have children, 97 
for promise of progeny, 56 to 58, 
65, 69, 78, 79, 116, 117 
for smooth delive!), of children, 68 
for surgical intervention in ddivery 
of child, 79 
Curses 
(for deniallloss of progeny) 
of brother, 140 
of evil spirits, 142, 143 
of father, 138 
of maternal relatives, 140, 141 / 
of mother, 138, 139 
of snakes for loss of progeny, 
137 
of spiritual persons, 141 
of women, 141, 142 
178 
Dashas 
for child birth, 37, 39, 40, 41, 45 
to 50, 56, 57, 58, 60, 64, 69, 
80, 84, 85, 86, 88, 89, 90, 91, 
94, 98, 110, 111 
for death of progeny, 112 
for infantile mortality in parents 
horoscopes, 84 
for mishaps and miscarriages, 
102 
for timing of marriage, 62 
of 5th lord for progeny, 70 
of Saturn for spiritual initiation, 
88 
Exchanges 
for denial of progeny, 137 to 143 
of 5th and 8th lord for denial of 
progeny, 139 
of 5th and 10th lord for denial of 
progeny, 138 
of Lagna and 5th lord for promise 
of progeny, 116 
Horoscopes 
of Gandhi, Indira, 11 
of Gandhi, Rajiv, 11 
of Gandhi, Sanjay, 12 
of Gandhi, Maneka, 12 
of Gandhi, Varun, 12 
of Kennedy, John F., 62, 63 
of Nehru, J awaharlal, 11 
of Radu (former Romanian 
Ambassador to India), 38 
of Raman, Dr. B.V., 111 
of Princess Anne, 67 
of Prince Charles, 8, 67 
of Princess Diana, 8 
of Prince Edward, 67 
of Prince Heruy, 8 
of QJJeen Elizabeth II, 66 
of Prince William, 8 
of cases of child birth delay, 78,79, 
81, 82, 83, 85, 86, 87, 89, 92 
of cases of miscarriages, 96, 101 
Interpretations 
of aspect 
of Mars on 5 [h, 9th houses and 
lords in parents' horoscopes 
for birth of the child, 22, 24, 
25 to 28 
of Moon on 5th, 9th houses and 
their lords in parents' 
horoscope for the birth of 
child, 22, 23, 25 to 28. 
of Sun on 5th house and 5th 
lord in parents' horoscope for 
the birth of the child, 22 
of afiliction of 5th house for 
denial of progeny, 138, 139 
of child's death from father's 
horoscope, 107 
of factors for denial of progeny, 
136 
of planets from the point of view 
of physical, moral. intellectual 
plane, 119 
Planets 
Jupiter with Rahu as 5th lord for 
loss of progeny, 137 
Moon in Scorpio as 5th lord for 
denial of progeny, 139 
Moon in Navamsha as a malefic 
for denial of progeny, 139 
Moon (weak) and the 4th house 
for the denial of progeny, 169 
Rahu in 5th house aspected by 
Mars for loss of progeny, 137 
Rahu with the 5th lord and Saturn 
for loss of progeny, 137 
Sun (debilitated) in 5th house for 
denial of progeny, 138 
Sun with malefics for denial of 
progeny, 138 
Sun in 8th house and Saturn in 
5th house with Rahu for denial 
of progeny, 138 
Sun (weak) and Jupiter in 10th 
house for denial of progeny, 169 
Role 
of exalted Mars for promise of 
progeny, 68 
of Jupiter for promise of progeny, 
85 
of Saptamsha and Navamsha for 
anal)"i' of child birth, 58, 80, 
84, 85, 88, 93, 94, 97, 102 
of Saptamsha for promise of 
progeny, 69, 70, 71 
of Saturn as child giver, 88, 89 
of Venus and Rahu in granting 
progeny, 57 
Transits for Child Birth 
of Jupiter, 7 to 10, 15 to 20, 39, 
40 to 43, 46, 47, 60, 65 80, 84, 
85, 86, 89, 98, 113 
of Mars, 7 to 11, 13, 22, 23 to 28, 
39, 40 to 43, 47, 65, 70, 80, 84, 
88, 99, 114 
of Moon, 7 to 11, 13, 22, 23, 25 
to 28, 40 to 43, 47, 65, 70, 88, 
99, 114. 
of Saturn, 7 to 10, 12, 13, 15 to 
20, 39, 40 to 43, 46, 47, 60, 69, 
70, 84, 86, 88, 89, 98, 113 
of Mars for conceiving the child, 
84 
Special Mentions 
Applicaton of 9 month Aspect 
Rule of Saturn and Jupiter, 
13,14 
Children from the second marriage 
and the role of the 9th house, 
93 
Checklist for promise of child's 
birth in a horoscope, 60 
Denial of progeny involving 3rd, 
4th and 7th hou,e" 169 
Dhruva Nadi anal)"i' of the author 
(K N Rao), 158 to 167 
Fifth house as spiritual merit of 
past life, 90 
179 
Importance of 5th and 9th houses 
and lords in parents' horoscopes 
for birth of child, 44, 64, 66, 
69, 80, 90, 91 
Importance of 11th house and its 
lord for pomi,e of child birth, 
65 
Propitiation of planets causing 
denial of progeny, 143 
Santanagopala Stotram, 
144 to 153 
Second marriage from 9th house, 
91 
Some puzzles and exercises for 
assessing promise of progeny, 
170 to 173 
Success of spiritual remedies for 
child birth, 93 
Techniques for calculating Kshetra 
Sphuta, 103 
Techniques for correcting a 
horoscope, 73 to 76 
Techniques to find out the promise 
of progeny in parents' horoscope, 
68,69 
Technique for examining promises 
of progeny, 168, 169 
Thumb rule for birth of children, 7 
Technical Tenns Used 
Aapaviddah, 134 
Adham Pravara, 134 
Adhana Lagna, 162 
Adhyudha, 133 
Agrahara, 161 
Ajyam, 120, 121, 128 
Amatyal=aka, 167 
Antardasha, 5 
Anantrajah, 132 
Anuloma, 132 
Anahata, 120 
Apatsanyasa, 167 
Aura,a, 132, 134 
Ayurveda, 90 
Beeja Sphuta, 22, 109. 
180 
Bhaktiyoga, 118 
Bhukti, 165, 166, 167 
Chandra hora, 162 
Chara Lagna, 161, 165 
Chitta, 119 . 
Chitrapaksha Ayanarnsha, 35, 53, 
55, 72, 108 
Chitra, 156, 161 
Dadhi, 120, 121, 126 
Dakshinayana, 161 
Dasi-prabhava, 134 
Datta, 133, 134 
Dhruva Nadi, 3, 156, 160 
Graha Shanti, 143 
Gudhotapanna, 134 
Harini, 159 
Haruni, 159, 160 
Hayamedha, 77 
Ikshu, 120, 121, 128 
Jaimini, 71, 159, 165 
Jalapalva, 159, 160 
Janmanakshatra, 156 
Jyotish Guru, 165 
Jyotish Shastra, 33 
Kalachakra, 159 
Kaneena, 133, 134 
Kanya, 161 
Karakamsha, 167 
Keeta, 161 
KokiIa, 159, 160 
Kokilamsha, 160, 161, 165, 167 
Krita, 133 
Kritakah, 134 
Kritrima, 134 
Kshatriyamsha, 160 
Kshar, 120, 121, 122 
Kshir, 120, 121, 122 
Kshetla,22 
Kshetra Sphuta, 103, 109 
Kshetraja, 134 
Kshudra mantra, 158 
Kunjanakirti, 159 
Mahadasha, 5 
Mahamantra, 158 
Maitriamsha, 159 
Mandi, 169 
Manipura, 120 
Marut, 159 
Mayashakti, 120 
Mesha , 162 
. Mithuna, 162 
Mooladhar, 120 
Nadi, 3, 156 
Nadiarnsha, 158, 160 
Nadigrantha, 158 
Niruktajah, 133 
Panchanga, 35 
Patitasya, 133 
Paunarbhava, 134 
Prabhava, 161 
Prajotpatti, 161 
Prasritijah, 133 
Pratiloma, 132 
Pratyakshara, 166 
Putraksraks, 30, 62, 103 
Sahoda, 134 
Samruta, 3 
Swadha, 159 
Swadhishthana, 120 
Uttaramsha, 161 
Vaisheshiksmsha, 116 
Vahini, 159 
Varuni, 159 
Vimshottari dasha, 5, 6 
Vipat dasha, 165 
Viprakalamsha Nadi, 161 
Books - Epics - Scriptures 
Antahakarana, Chatushtayam, 
119 
Bhagvad Gita, 118 
Bhagvad Purana, 118 
Bhrigu Sambita, 156 
Brihad Jataks, 134 
Brihad Parashara Hora Shastra, 
36, 121, 136 
Brihadaranyaks Upanishad, 1 
Chhandogya Upanishad, 133 
Harivansha Purana, 99, 143 
Kalpavriksha, 99 
Mahabharata, 115, 132, 133, 134, 
135 
Saravali, 134, 135 
Sarvartha Chintamaru, 117 
Shantiparva, 132 
Srimad Bhagvatam, 33 
Upanishads, 2 
Journals 
The Astrological Magazine,S, 62, 
70, 108, 109, 159 
Institutions, Organisations 
Allahabad High Court, 15 
Archaeological Survey of India, 19 
Bharatiya Vidya Bhawan, vii, 73 
Bhartiya, 99 
Calendar Reforms Committee, 35 
Indian Council of Astrological 
Sciences (Chapter-I), 36 
Indian Railways, 19 
Janata Dal, 18 
Ved Vidya Pratishthan, 158 
Places 
Allahabad, 15 
Andhra Pradesh, 31 
Bangalore, 62 
Bombay, 104 
California, 156 
Gorakhpur, 20 
Karnataka, 20 
Masulipatnam, 14, 159 
Madhya Pradesh, 16 
Rajasthan, 16 
San Rafael, 156 
Santa Fe, 158 
U P, 20, 30 
Vrindavan, 93 
Persons 
Agarwal, N., Ms. 17, 24 
Anand, Usha, Ms., 17, 20, 25 
Anne, Princess, 67, 69 
Bhakri, Ms., 24 
Bhallari, S., Ms., 17 
Caroli, Dr. R.K., 19 
Charan Singh, 15, 23 
Charles, Prince, 7, 8, 9, 67, 68 
Clinton, Bill, 70 
Dangwal, 16, 24 
Desai, Kantilal, 16, 23 
Desai, Morarji, 16, 23 
181 
Diana, Princess, 7, 8, 9, 68 
Edward, Prince, 67, 68, 69 
Elizabeth II, Qyeen, 65, 66, 72 
Gandhi, Indira, 10, 11, 12, 30, 159 
Gandhi, Mahatma, 165 
Gandhi, Maneka, 12, 22 
Gandhi, Rajiv, 12, 13, 30, 159 
Gandhi, Sanjay, 12, 22, 30 
Gandhi, Varnn, 13, 22 
Gauqulin, Michael, 108, 109, 112 
Gupta, Kauta, Ms., 115 
Gupta, Y.N., 20 
Henry, Prince, 7, 8, 9, 10 
Jain, Kuldip, 16 
Johri, B.S., 15, 23 
K. Rama Rao, vii 
K. Saraswani Devi, vii, 155 
Kaicker, A., 16, 24 
Kalelkar, Saryu, 34 
Kennedy, J.F., 62 
Koley, Ms. 24 
Kovoors, 15 
Krishna Kant, Mr. & Mrs., 18 
Jha, Sitararn, 36 
Lahiri, 55, 62, 108 
Laxmi Ms., 17, 24 
Lokhande, Mr. & Mrs., 20 
Malviya, P., 16, 24 
Mehra, P., Ms., 17 
Mehra, I.K., Ms., 24 
Mehta, K., Ms., 17 
Merimee 34 
Mulgaonkar, S., 132 
Nanda, Gulzarilal, 15 
Narasimhiahs, 15 
Natwar Singh, Mr. & Mrs., 18 
Neelakanthan, Mrs., 115 
182 
Nehru, Jawaharlal, vii, 11 
Pande, G.c., Dr., 16, 23 
Pant, K.C., Mr. & Mrs., 18 
Pawan Kumar, 16 
Pod dar, B.P., 15, 23 
Raman, Dr. RV., 3, 62, 108, 109, 
112, 113, 114, 156, 157 
Ramesam, Pantalu, 158 
Saxena, M" Ms., 17,24 
Shaheed, Shiraz, Ms., 19 
Sharma, Indu, Ms, 17, 25 
Shastri, La! Bahadur, 15, 23 
Shastri Narayana, 158 
Shukla, K., Ms., 17, 25 
Singh, CPN, 15, 23 
Singh, H.N. Mr. & Mrs., 19 
Tripathi, Mr. & Mrs., 20 
Thomas, Prof, 104 
Vidyaratna, Kusum, Ms., iii 
Gods/Goddesses and Religious 
Personages 
Arishta, 115 
Balram, 33 
Bhargava, Rishi, 167 
Bhaskaranand, Yogi, vii, 167 
Bheeshma, 132 
Bhrigu, Maharshi, 14 
Christ, Jesus, 135 
Dhenuka, 115 
Devahut1, 118 
Garg, Rishi, 33 
Gautam, Rishi, 133, 134, 135 
Jabala, 133 
Kalyanvarma, 134 
Kamsa, 115 
Kapil., 118 
Kauravas, 134 
Keshi, 115 
Krishna, Lord (Balkrishna, Gopal), 
33, 93, 94, 99, 114 
Nanda Baba, 33 
Pandavas, 134 
Parasham, 115, 121, 137, 143 
Putna, 115 
Saraswati, Sawmi Parmanand, 
vii, 165 
Satyakama, Rishi, 133, 134 
Shiva, Lord, 143, 162 
Varahamihir, 134 
Vidur, 135 
Vishnu, Lord, 93, 162 
Yudhishtira, 132 
General 
Aahar, 1 
Ahankar, 119 
Brahmachari, 133 
Brahmacharya Ashram, 134 
Brahmins, 14, 30, 31, 134, 161, 
166 
Buddhi, 119 
Darshan,2 
Devanagari, 160 
Gunas 
(Sattva, Tamas, Rajas), 
118, 120 
Hindu Dharmashastra. 135 
Hindus, 14, 35, 135, 160 
Januna, 115 
Janmashtami, 99 
Kannada, 160 
Kanyadan, 143 
Kaurav Darbar, 135 
Kundalini Yoga, 120 
Lokas 
(Munushya, Pitra, Deva), 1 
Maharshi, 30 
Maithun, 1 
Mantrik, 158 
Manus, 119 
Muslim, 104 
Nidra, 1 
Niyoga, 133 
Nobel Prize, 15 
Paishachika, 160 
Prashna, 14 
Rudrajapam, 148 
Sadhana, 14, 120, 160 
Sahasra, 120 
Sanskdt, 3, 6, 119 
Santan Gopa!, 99 
Satlvil" 31 
Shuddhaja!, 120, 121, 130 
Shudra, 159 
Siddhi, 156 
Skanda, 33 
Sudravarna, 160 
Tantrik, 158 
Telugu, 160 
Tithi, 35 
Upaya, 71 
Varsharitu, 161 
Vishudhi, 120 
183 
\ 